A Introduction fter reading and researching bestselling books and memoirs written by people with autism, I realized I wasn’t finding what I really wanted to read. And that is where this memoir was born. There are lots of great how-to books with instruction and guidance. For example, Dr. Temple Grandin is a fascinating and informative writer and can write technically about the brain and how it works differently in autistic people. I am far from an expert on autism or its history, but what I do have is an experience as someone with Asperger’s whom many people don’t recognize as someone with Asperger’s. Even though the prevalence of autism in society has grown exponentially, and is probably even more prevalent than we know, most people still seem to have a very narrow view of what autism is—what it “looks” like, how it is manifested, and what behaviors are associated with it. Those who are interested may know that there are a lot of people who believe such figures as Albert Einstein or Beethoven were autistic. Some of you may have come across an article or two about an autistic savant who cannot communicate verbally but can play technically difficult music on a piano or sketch an entire city skyline in perfect detail having only seen it once. But there is another shade on the autism spectrum that encompasses people who are characterized as the “quiet” guys, the “shy” girls, or the “loners,” with a unique propensity for fascination. Of course, there are people who are shy and obsessed with trains who are not on the spectrum, but for those who are, there is more going on than many people realize. When people talk about those who are autistic, but “just a little bit,” most people go for the most common characteristics they know of. Typically, they believe, autistic people have very little interest in others, don’t feel emotions, don’t like to be touched, are intensely interested in a few specialized hobbies, are unable to talk in social settings, and have anger problems, just to name a few. These may be common, but they by no means define all autistic people. Even less is known about women, particularly, when it comes to autism. The accounts of women on the spectrum that I’ve read are fascinating, and it is interesting to see women’s memoirs coming across as more personal than many of the men’s memoirs. Some of it has to do with writing style, perhaps. But there is one main thing that I, personally, wanted to try doing differently. I didn’t want to write about the subject in a dry way. It is a big mistake to think that people who have been diagnosed with Asperger’s, especially women, do not feel emotions. Some of the most interesting female accounts I’ve come across have come from video journals on YouTube. They are created by women who are hurting, lonely, and who feel like the only way they might be able to connect with someone is through the internet, and that they must lay it all out on the table in order to find someone who might sympathize, or, more importantly, empathize. These women I’ve listened to have a lot in common. They are lonely and they don’t have many friends, if any. They struggle with comorbid diagnoses like depression and anxiety. And, finally, they typically aren’t diagnosed until later in life, at least compared with boys. I watched one lecture by a woman who was 38 when she finally got a diagnosis. She had spent many years lost and depressed and confused about the core of her struggles. I wanted to write about some of the struggles that women with autism face, but I also wanted to highlight some of the gifts and strengths that come with Asperger’s. Of course, this is going to be just one example, and the range of possibilities for similarities and differences between myself and other women with Asperger’s is endless. I don’t want to pretend like I am speaking for the group—just myself. To this end, I wrote this memoir as a personal narrative while organizing much of the content into categories that I think are important for understanding life as a woman with Asperger’s. My ultimate goal is simply to shed some light on Asperger’s in women and how it can affect a woman’s life as well as the lives around her. The prevalence of autism is growing, and there doesn’t seem to be any stopping it. I think we have a lot to learn and wrap our minds around as a society before we can begin to understand the value in having people around who see things a bit differently, and who feel things a bit differently. After all, according to many people, some of the greatest entries in human cultural and scientific history have come from the weird man or woman who never went to parties and preferred to stay up all night studying their singular fascinations in life. My family does not make much of an appearance in this book, simply because my experience with autism and Asperger’s began much later in life. With that said, I was incredibly lucky to be raised in a loving and supportive household. My brother and I attended a private school outside of our school district simply because my parents wanted the absolute best for us. My brother attended boy scouts, and I was chauffeured around to hundreds of dance classes and competitions throughout my pre-teen and teenage years. I love my family very much, and I am grateful for their unending love and support which has endured throughout my life. T Foreword he greatest friendship I ever had was with a girl named Amber. I went to school with her in second or third grade. She danced, like me. She could fall into a trance in the music, like me. That’s basically all we ever did when we got together. At school, the other kids in my class made fun of us because we only spent time with each other. They called us “lesbians,” but I didn’t really know what that meant, and we didn’t care anyway. We were always in a different world, playing pretend and incorporating our surroundings into it. The real world didn’t exist, but we used elements of it to enhance our own. I can still feel how magic permeated the air, making the old forgotten metal poles of a swing set turn into the columns of an ancient ruin. When Amber was absent from school, I would go exploring on my own, getting lost in chasing butterflies across a strange trail of rocks that stretched all along the border of the large playground behind the private Christian school I would attend for nine years. Sometimes I would collect things, a strange-looking plant or rock. I felt the sensation of being a lost princess discovering the world for the first time. What is strange is that I remember Amber being there, and then I remember her…not being there. I have no recollection of what happened to her in between. I feel like it must have happened in the summer, between school years. She must have moved to a different school, or maybe a different city, for all I knew. But I don’t remember being sad or having any reaction at all to her disappearing. I just remember at some point I had a sudden realization: “Oh, hey. I wonder where Amber went…she’s gone now.” But again, I don’t think that thought even occurred to me until long afterward. When I think about Amber now, many years later, I cherish the memories I have of her because I have not experienced a similar closeness with another friend since. Perhaps this has to do with being a child—open and honest and innocent. But when I received confirmation from a psychologist about my suspicions of Asperger’s Syndrome four years ago at the age of 28, I began to recognize a pattern of having known people, then suddenly seeing them drop from my life without a trace. I’ve had no concept of nurturing or maintaining friendships; they’ve always simply appeared out of convenience or coincidence. Eventually I was to learn the difference between authentic and inauthentic relationships, and what it means when you mistake one for the other. But I was also destined to meet someone who could show me a new version of love—brutally honest, passionate, and relentless. PART I: A Late Diagnosis I Chapter 1: Anderson Summer arrived early to the school because I knew I’d need a few minutes to gather myself. Nothing made me more anxious than having to rush to an appointment. My job interview was scheduled for 3 pm. It was 2:45 as I pulled into one of the parking spaces closest to the door. The building had been converted from a gym to a school, and letters spelling out “Anderson” loomed overhead. Anderson Learning Center was a school for kids with autism. I’d found the ad advertising open positions for student aides and counselors on Craigslist a week earlier. The ad advised that the person would be paired with a student on the autism spectrum and be responsible for supervision and assistance during the 2013 summer activities camp program. “Position requires someone who is patient and compassionate. No experience needed, will train.” There were different colored cones lining the parking lot. Some kind of system for dismissal, I assumed, which would be happening shortly. I lit a cigarette, despite knowing that smoking would only make me more anxious. I kept looking toward the large double doors. They were daunting, neighbored by windows that were just as large, showing the spaces of small rooms off the entrance. No one was in them right now. The building seemed unreasonably quiet, despite the gathering of cars lining up in the parking lot, ready to pick up the children. A new wave of anxiety flooded over me; you don’t belong here. Thoughts invaded my mind; you should turn around and just go home. You have no idea what you’re doing. It was true, I had no experience with this kind of job. You’re just a cashier, a barista, stick with what you know. I very nearly put the key in the ignition, but then I remembered why I quit my job at the coffee shop in the first place. It was a meaningless, mechanical routine. I felt I had more to offer and wanted to find that purpose. I had a bachelor’s degree in English and knew how to think and form creative ideas. Surely, I could adapt myself to something challenging and fascinating like autism. And, I thought, I would be contributing something of value to the world. I had been so excited when I got the phone call requesting an interview for the summer program position. But now, as the interview approached, my mind wanted to collapse. I looked one more time at the clock, 2:55. Now or never. I can’t mess this up. I don’t want to be a robot for the rest of my life. I grabbed my purse and a black folder containing my resumé, got out of the car, and made my way to the front door. I walked in and smiled at the receptionist. “Hi, I’m Elizabeth. I have an interview at 3:00.” “Oh yes, I’ll page Alex. Please have a seat.” I did. Soon after, a bell sounded, and an announcement was made over the intercom. “Can we please have the blue group ready for dismissal. Blue group, ready for dismissal.” A moment later, children’s voices flooded the hallways that funneled toward the front entrance. Teachers led lines of students outside as their colors were called. Many of them were escorted by hand by an adult, while others tried running out of line before being caught by another staff member with a walkie-talkie and helped back into their lines. Mostly boys. I saw three or four girls, their heads down, lost in an app on their phones. “Hello, Elizabeth.” I stood and shook hands with a thin, casually dressed man about my age. “Follow me, let’s go into one of the rooms here where it’s quiet.” I followed him into one of the small rooms I’d observed earlier. The doors were remarkably effective at silencing the sounds of so many kids going by. “Alright, I’ll take a look at that,” he said as I handed him the black folder, “and I’ve got some questions for you. After that, I’d be happy to show you around if you’d like.” “Ok, sure.” I smiled, sitting straight up, nerves completely on edge. I implored myself to simply be honest in this situation. “So, I guess the first expected question here would be, why do you want this position?” He smiled. I told him many things at that point, careful to avoid any unnecessary tangents. I was interested in autism, and I found it fascinating. I also described having felt a “wave of compassion” at the thought of helping make these kids’ lives better in some way. Despite years of masking and giving bullshit answers at interviews, I was struck by how much I truly felt what I was expressing to Alex, the summer camp organizer. It must have been appreciated because a few days later, I was offered the job. June 14 was day one of training before camp was to begin the following week. Looking at the training schedule on Google docs made me anxious once again. I didn’t understand how a single week was enough to prepare me for a job at which I was supposed to work with no previous experience. Maybe that was ok for a cashier or barista, but an aide for a child with autism? From the first tour of the school on interview day, I’d begun picking up on signs of how unorganized and unprepared the program seemed to be. At least, it was my impression that there was precious little organization. It was oddly reassuring and helped me feel like I wasn’t a fish out of water, watching all the others swimming smoothly by. I soon learned that the school was simply very…laid back. The kids were given a lot of freedom, and the summer program was about having fun and learning some social skills. We wouldn’t have to track data or enforce rigid class agendas like they did during the school year. I was given a rough idea of what the activities for each day would be, and in what order. In our first staff meeting, I met another aide assigned to my group as well as the teacher assigned to our class. Her name was Brittany, and she seemed nervous as well, though not debilitatingly so. Apparently, she’d been an aide for the summer program before, and this was to be her first time as the group leader. Homerooms were assigned the day before the camp was to begin. A couple of things made this very difficult for me to memorize. First, the building itself was a huge gym that was in the process of being renovated as a school. There were several very large hallways leading to a few large spaces, and in between were classroom after classroom after classroom labeled (mostly) with large numbers next to or above the doors. In addition, there were a couple of hallways with a single entryway that I managed to confuse repeatedly, as well as two identical (at least to me) former racquetball court areas that were being used as training classrooms; during the school year they served as lunch rooms for the students. As none of the other newbies seemed to have any difficulty navigating the building, I took it upon myself to discreetly walk the length of the building several times, trying my best to memorize numbers and visual cues that told me where I was. Through this process, I discovered that following the building’s hallways from the widest area led me in a complete circle, the front being the front lobby, and the back being part of the largest open space in the building, which served as the students’ recess or free time area. Gradually, I became more confident with where I was supposed to be and at what time. There must have been around 12 newbies that summer. Having another aide in my classroom, Nole, was a huge help, because I did not feel overly anxious with him around to watch as a guide. He was one of the most unimposing and gentle people I’ve ever met, and this was very good for my nerves. Most men made me feel very uncomfortable, as a general rule. Nole was very soft-spoken, and a little quirky. He was a lot like Alex, but completely laid back, while Alex was under pressure to keep things under control for his first summer and program leader. Brittany, our classroom teacher, was bubbly and friendly, with short brown hair that bounced around in a bob. It didn’t seem to bother her too much that she was going to be responsible for organizing and leading a group of six kids with varying degrees of autism. One of the things that had been stressed in training lectures was the importance of being able to rely on others’ support and guidance. “One of the best things about this summer program, and that I see each year,” Alex had said, “is that by the end of it, you all will be very close; it’s sort of the nature of the job.” I remember feeling warmed by the sentiment, but at the same time jabbed in the side by the cold awareness that I would probably be excluded from this natural course. It was a kind of instant, subconscious confirmation that I’d identified many times indirectly, and it tended to resonate just enough to make its presence known before hiding under the covers again. I’d worked and reworked formulas for how to act, react, and internalize sentiments just like this one because it’s what everyone else did, but I rarely felt them personally. One of the key trainings before camp started was all about the fundamentals of ABA—Applied Behavioral Analysis. We learned a bit about the history, about B.F. Skinner and his research, and how ABA had shown itself to be the most successful form of intervention for a child with autism, as it helps him learn and manage difficult emotions and behaviors. During the school year, behaviors, goals, and progress were meticulously recorded on charts called “celeration” charts, though we were assured that we wouldn’t have to worry about recording data for the summer program. I was certainly relieved to hear that, though I was fascinated by the degree of complexity and meticulous attention to detail present in the charts. But, as we only had a few days to prepare before camp, we were given just the rudimentary basics. First, and perhaps foremost, at this school, zero punishment was used. No reprimanding, no detention, no sending a student out of the room by force. The school functioned by the principle of reinforcement, and we were taught the basics of positive reinforcement, which included things like oral praise and candy for engaging in proper behaviors and emotion management. Less frequently, the teachers used negative reinforcement, which tends to be misunderstood as punishment. Negative reinforcement actually signifies the taking away of stimuli that are causing the child distress, like the sound of a loud annoying buzzer being turned off. In one form of reinforcement something is added, and in the other, something is taken away, but both serve as reinforcement for desired behaviors. Part of the lecture highlighted successful experiments using ABA and animals. Pavlov’s dog might be the most widely recognized example. Naturally, questions arose from this like, “Aren’t we just bribing the kids to do what we want?” and “Why are we treating children like animals?” The lecturers had responses to each of these common questions, but I remember considering them to be unsatisfactory. Basically, she said, the instructor needs to be able to pay attention and discern when a child is making progress on a behavior through reinforcement or simply adjusting behaviors temporarily to get some candy. These observations take time to consider, hence the consistent and vigorous charting of specific data based on each child’s IEP, or Individualized Education Plan. On the final day of training, we were asked to gather everything we needed for the first day of camp and prepare our classrooms. There was a person in charge of creating material for each subject. Depending on the child’s group, activities for the day included art, music, social skills, swimming and life skills. I followed a few of the teachers alongside Nole to grab the lesson plans and materials for our first art block. When we arrived, we found the art supply room in complete disarray, and the lesson plans had not been completely laid out. In response, someone spoke up and said, “eh…I know, just have them do this…” The person then demonstrated how we could have the kids cut out shapes and glue them together to make different nature scenes on construction paper. I listened half-heartedly but was unable to stop focusing on the crayons and crackers strewn all over the floor, various half-empty packages of construction paper and plastic bins full of puzzle pieces, destroyed glue sticks, and kids’ scissors. Picking up on the signs of confusion and disorganization on a large scale made me feel infinitely better about my own perpetual feeling of being lost. But it was also deeply unsettling to find that there were no clear rules to follow or strict expectations—people just seemed to be “winging it,” which terrified me because this wasn’t a skill I was sure I had. At the same time, I felt alleviated of the pressure that people were scrutinizing my every move. My perception then was that the expectation had been removed completely. However, to say that I felt relieved because there were no expectations is not to say I looked forward to doing things carelessly without consequence and getting paid for it. On the contrary, I looked for opportunities to show that I could perform better than anyone had hoped for. I had paid close attention to the lectures and studied articles to prepare myself. I felt relief at the thought that I was not going to stick out as particularly clueless. It is a weight on my chest I’ve always carried, a deep fear of being found out as incompetent or appearing careless or callous. I had no clue about Asperger’s yet, but I had experienced the anxiety of being “found out” for as long as I could remember. Not having a strict program with clear direction was both intimidating and freeing. Finally, the first day of camp was here. I reassured myself by going over the aspects of camp that I was sure I had a grip on. I knew where our classroom was (after much practice), I knew roughly what our classes were and in what order. Honestly, I decided not to worry about this too much because I wasn’t the teacher, expected to lead. My sole responsibility was Emerald, age 13. Emerald actually had a unique and rare condition called Angelman syndrome. It targets the nervous system and makes things like balance and movement through space challenging. She was also nonverbal, but I was told offered the most incredible smiles, full of joy and warmth. The only information I had was her name and age, but all of the veteran Andersonites seemed to know her very well and would point her out to me. I should mention too that I had spent countless hours since receiving the job offer watching documentaries, YouTube videos, and reading articles and I virtually felt like I knew as much as anybody about autism. Of course, knowledge in theory is very different from knowledge in practice. At any rate, that morning I had arrived early and felt the pangs of anxiety shortly after. I greeted the woman at the front desk (whose name I could never remember despite seeing her every morning) and walked straight to the classroom, where surely Brittany and Nole would be sitting, actively preparing for the day’s activities… I rounded the last sharp turn down the hallways and saw that not only was our room dark, but the hallway and all adjacent classrooms were dark as well! In my head—it’s almost 8 o’clock! We start in fifteen minutes! Did I mess up the time? Where is Brittany?! What do I do?! Maybe we were supposed to meet somewhere else and I totally didn’t catch it. Where am I supposed to be? What am I supposed to do… “Hey.” I turned around and saw Nole carrying a black backpack he would carry around every day for the whole summer. “Hey,” I replied, sounding a little nervous, “Where’s Brittany?” He casually glanced in the direction of the classroom. “Hmm, I don’t know,” he answered, then he walked in, turned on the light, and tossed his backpack on the floor in the corner. He was totally and completely calm. Or if he had nerves at all, he hid them well enough from me. As we left the classroom to head up to the lobby, I fought hard to stay sane, reasoning that if Allison, the teacher, was not in the ready position, then I was ahead of the curve, and that meant everyone else was still in the dark about me. Any misstep in social interaction would mean one of several horrifying reactions—pity, concern, confusion, a perception that I am unhappy, incredibly ignorant, or that I don’t like the person. Or, worst of all, the perception that I am in fact coming on to the person! (This last had often proved to be a Pandora’s box of miscalculation and misunderstanding, and had resulted in unbearable embarrassment, whether or not my own perception of the situation had been accurate.) By the time we got back to the lobby, everyone had apparently arrived and had begun congregating to the left of the front desk where there were a few giant, comfortable chairs. It was now 8:13, and the first bunches of kids and their parents were starting to approach the door. Still no Brittany in sight. I was fairly petrified. I looked over at Nole, sitting completely slouched, engaged in conversation about something trivial with one of the other new hires. I was shocked by his behavior, though it was certainly not a new feeling. I’d always felt my level of alertness exceeded everyone around me, heightened further by my nerves. But damn, Nole! I was sure that if someone ran in and shook a poisonous snake in his face he would chuckle and wave it off! Of course, I was also very jealous of his state of mind. It seemed everyone around me knew every course of action for each and every possibility. Each had been tested and proven adequate, and there was no possible situation that would catch them off guard. I, on the other hand, was creating on the fly, second by second, creating new databases full of situations and planning for how to deal with them properly. I would observe and imitate; careful not to mimic exactly, though, because that’s just creepy. I also had to calibrate my mood and emotions with those around me. According to how everyone else around me appeared, I was not supposed to be nervous right now. Therefore, I relaxed my posture and tried not to stare at the front doors like a soon-to-be-slaughtered deer. The only thing that could have made these moments easier for me would have been someone exclaiming “oh my god I’m so scared right now…” But of course, that didn’t happen. I carefully held my position at the proper distance from others, but without being in anyone’s way. Wave after wave of children with their parents or caretakers walked in. Some stayed standing in the lobby. Others gunned it straight for the hallways as if they knew exactly where they were supposed to go. I felt like people were watching me to see where I would mess this up or become intimidated and this made it all the more imperative that I maintain my façade. Eventually, someone spotted Emerald and pointed her out to me. She approached the doors with her mother; a thin, pretty woman who looked barely forty, but with noticeable circles around her eyes. Emerald was thin and tall, with short brown hair and pink sandals that always stick out in my memory of her because of her heavy, lop-sided gait. But much more memorable than anything else was her wide, exuberant smile as she walked in the door. I got a strong twinge of anxiety right then because I knew she was happy to see someone else, someone she remembered from last summer, and not me. She doesn’t know me yet…what if she ends up hating me? Seeing right through me to the part of me that feels lost and clueless? I didn’t have time to dwell on this long. One of the teachers waved at Emerald’s mother and motioned for me to step forward. “Emerald, this is Elizabeth, Elizabeth this is Emerald.” I said, “hello, Emerald.” My pitch was too high, though it felt similar to how everyone else was speaking to her. “I’m going to be hanging out with you this summer.” She looked at me, but not at my face. She seemed fixated on my head… then I felt a surprisingly strong tug on my scalp as my head is jerked forward, Emerald grasping tightly to a fist-full of my hair. I grabbed the base of my ponytail, just like we were taught in training, and used my other hand to remove it from Emerald’s grip. Her mother reprimanded her and grabbed her hands, telling her to be good and that she knew better than that. I could sense a lot of embarrassment in her voice. “It’s fine, really.” I did my best to hide the fact that my scalp was pulsing with pain and maintained the stalwart smile that was my constant uniform as I thought about how to shift the conversation. The school director took care of that for me, as if she knew how I felt, much to my relief. “You’re going to have so much fun this summer, Emerald!” she said. After the general niceties passed, Emerald’s mother proceeded to give me a few bits of advice and a request or two regarding her daughter’s care, then she headed out the door, waving goodbye to Emerald. The morning ritual that followed was relentlessly unchanging through the duration of camp… Emerald didn’t want to come with me to the classroom. She preferred to hang out in the front lobby and insisted on spending time with one of the new lifeguards, Cait, who was due at the pool. Cait was several years younger than me, super cute and energetic. Emerald was immediately attracted to her and it seemed no matter how creative my ploys or encouraging words, I could not get Emerald to accompany me down the hall. After a few morning struggles, Cait got into a routine of walking with both of us to the classroom. I told myself that I would grow on her and soon she would gladly follow me where I needed to take her. This never fully came to fruition, but it did get a little easier. On that first morning I did glean some comfort from looking over at Nole, who was also being introduced to his student for the first time. I thought I recognized a bit of the nervousness and unpreparedness I’d felt myself, and I was happy to have some company in my classroom, though Nole never truly looked distressed. Our classroom lead teacher, Brittany, after having caused incredible anxiety in me from being late, did indeed arrive while I was being introduced to Emerald and was in the classroom when we arrived. As we sat down, Emerald grabbed another chunk of hair from the back of my head underneath my ponytail. I understood now why girls always had to have their hair pulled back. Far trickier was learning to anticipate and dodge the ninja-like strikes that would land anywhere between my face and stomach. My reflexes at the beginning of camp were poor, and I would wear the bruises for it. I sat down with Emerald next to Nole and the other kids who had arrived. There was Anne, one of a pair of twin sisters at the camp. They were placed in different classrooms for obvious reasons. Hannah, who would sort of become a personal project as far as reaching out and trying to connect with her. Jayesh, a very thin Indian boy who was also nonverbal. There was Nole’s student, Kit, and then there was Jordan, a very sweet, adorable kid, for whom water was a very scary thing. All of the students in our class were nonverbal except for Anne and Hannah. Kit would say a few words here and there, and Hannah would give one- or two-word answers to direct questions. Anne was the only one who could really communicate to us effectively with words. This was the group of kids for which we were directly responsible for the next ten weeks. From the outset, I realized that the Anderson environment and the way they ran things was far less structured and predictable than any job I’d ever had before. At the coffee shop, I had a firm set of steps to follow for each and every customer interaction, right down to what words to say and having each recipe memorized. Anderson was so different, so loose. I felt like I was drifting around in the ocean, getting pulled this way and that by the tide. I tried to generally drift in the same direction as those around me and then disappear from view when I wasn’t sure what to do. Nevertheless, the summer marched forward. I gained many bruises, but also some very cherished memories, like when Emerald had finally gotten used to me and one day on the playground let me cradle her head in my lap as I combed her hair with my fingers as she fell asleep. And when the boy who was so afraid of water finally got the courage to get into the pool! It was so exciting. I learned a great deal about autism through working and through watching tons of documentaries in the evenings. As the ten-week camp came to a close, I was asked to stay on as a one-on-one aide for another student who would be attending the high school, an area I had not been in yet. I was thrilled and said yes, of course. I Chapter 2: An Anderson School Year n the fall of 2014, I began working full time at Anderson as an aide for a high school kid named Tyler. He was a second-year student in the high school. I’d never met any of the high school kids. I don’t think many of them came to the summer camp, which was mostly for the younger kids and older kids that were in a separate program. The high school area of the building was new territory as well. It branched off from the building’s center through a narrow hallway that led to an even longer hallway with several large classrooms. My job was to basically watch Tyler throughout the day and make sure that there were no problematic behaviors for which it had been necessary to establish careful intervention plans. From the start, I knew I wanted to step up a little from that role and do as much for the classroom teachers as I could. One of them, named Corrie, was especially kind and helpful. We had a similar sense of humor and she was a lot of fun to work with. I felt a little frustrated and embarrassed sometimes, as she had a way of communicating with her eyes and speaking in super low volumes that was always very difficult to understand. I couldn’t hear her, and I could never quite figure out what her eyes were trying to say. I eventually got pretty good at faking that I understood. I began each day by waiting in front of the front doors with all of the other aides and some teachers. Tyler arrived about the same time every day. He was a few inches taller than me, very thin, with a smile that made his eyes disappear. He laughed a lot, but I sensed that a lot of the time he was laughing because he was trying to hide how he really felt. I tried to imagine what it would feel like, to have someone assigned to follow you around all day during school. I never saw any of the other kids say anything to him about it, and no one made fun of him. After greeting him at the door, I walked him back through a second set of doors and down the first of two hallways that comprised the core of the high school area. The first room we came to was home room. The kids had different classes and moved to different rooms for each, just like any other high school, except that all of these classrooms had little baskets filled with small, rectangular timers. Aside from the kids with individualized behavior plans, all of the kids followed similar basic rules about what was to happen when they needed a break or earned “reward time” for good, consistent behavior. If a student got frustrated and needed some time to himself/herself, he/she could grab a timer (in most cases) and spend about five minutes outside in the hallway to calm down. Other times, when a student earned time as a reward, we called one of the behavior techs who patrolled the halls to come and spend a few minutes with the student. Some would go down to the gym to play basketball for a few minutes, others just wanted to walk, etc. I quickly came to recognize those timers as special commodities, as they would often go missing or break. Most of the teachers knew to have a small hidden stash to keep for their classrooms for as long as they could. As long as I worked as Tyler’s classroom aide, he never did a single thing to warrant a report or intervention. As a result, I had opportunities to help the teachers in various ways, and it felt really good to be able to do that and feel competent, even skilled, at these tasks. One student, Parker, needed frequent breaks outside of the classroom, and I would often go outside with him and watch him to make sure he was ok. Certain things would frustrate him, and sometimes other students would say things to upset him because they thought it was funny, and he really struggled with letting these things go. Every student handled situations like that differently, and I remember realizing how incredibly unique each and every one of them was in regard to individual autistic traits and behaviors. People seem to generalize autism in a way that when they picture a young student with autism, they all see the same thing. But there are so many different characteristics, many more than there are similarities, and it is so important to notice and appreciate how each student works and to try and understand and work with those unique differences. Unfortunately, there are not a lot of places where you can have a setting for education and also give individual attention to the extent that is needed. So, this is where I tried to focus my energy a lot of the time. If I noticed Parker getting upset, I would immediately try to be what he needed in that moment, take him outside, listen to his jokes (oh dear lord, there were some zingers), and comfort him when he just needed a few minutes to re-center. When another student in Tyler’s class, Luke, needed help with homework, I would work with him for several minutes at the end of the class period or during free time because he needed to be walked through some of the lessons more thoroughly than regular class time allowed. It felt amazing to be able to do this for those kids, and I felt like in some small way I was making a difference in their lives. For those few months when I worked in the high school, I was very happy. There were some scary moments when I questioned whether or not I had been prepared enough for the job, however. Being high school kids, and mostly boys, a lot of them were much bigger than me, and I knew that if one of them started to get frustrated, I would not be able to handle the situation on my own. I would need to call one of the techs on the walkie for assistance (and our team was pretty amazing, considering how many teachers they had to try and accommodate). They not only had to respond to assistance calls for behaviors, but they were supposed to be there to escort students to various places all over the building; some students needed to be escorted to the bathroom and back. They were also the go-to people for fun time and reward time where they would either just hang out with a student or watch the playground areas. One afternoon, during math class in Corrie’s classroom, something very extraordinary occurred. Tyler’s math class was combined with another class in the afternoon, and one of the students in this class was Matthew. Matthew was a very big kid, tall and bulky. Most of the time he was great in the classroom and did very well. He had spent several years at Anderson and had shown incredible progress, but we had to be constantly aware and alert to the atmosphere in the classroom, because if he became frustrated, it would suddenly become very important that we do the right things in order to make sure everyone was safe and that we could de-escalate quickly. This particular afternoon, one of the other kids decided to make fun of Matthew in front of everyone. Most of the time Matthew could shrug it off, but that day he wasn’t having it. What made this a different situation than most others was that Matthew did not show any signs of frustration right away; he seemed to have slowly burned, trying very hard to keep his cool. Neither Corrie nor I noticed what was going on until it was too late, and I was in the middle of it. It happened when Corrie had to leave the room to go down the hallway to borrow some supplies from another classroom. I was left alone with the class. Suddenly, the student egging Matthew on said one too many things and Matthew shot up out of his desk, overturning it and throwing it to the side. I got on my walkie and stepped back a bit. Matthew walked over to the door, and I was terrified that he was going to run away or something. But he didn’t. He stood there, holding the door firmly closed. And he was heavy enough that there was no one in the entire building who could move him. So, I’m there, in the classroom with the kids. Matthew standing against the door and refusing to move. There was a tall, narrow window in the door and through it I could see several behavior techs running around the corner and to the outside of the door. I knew I had to try to say something to convince him to let the kids out. He seemed to be somewhat calm, but I could also see him seething underneath, like one wrong word would completely set him off. So I waited in silence for a few seconds. Then I asked gently, “Would it be alright if I left with the rest of the class, and you could hang out in here for a bit?” He simply said, “no.” I glanced at the crowd of people now gathered outside in the hallway. The head guy of the behavior techs started to talk to Matthew through the door, asking if he could open the door just a little bit. Eventually, Matthew let him, and from there we managed to convince him to let me leave with the kids and take them to the cafeteria. I distinctly remember the feeling of walking out of that classroom, feeling like everyone in the hallway was looking at me. I walked out and passed them with a stone face, eyes downcast, not looking at anyone. I wasn’t sure how I was supposed to feel, and I was terrified that someone would notice that. Because that’s what it all comes down to, honestly. I don’t know how the fuck I’m supposed to feel and I’m terrified that I’m not going to feel or act a certain way when I’m supposed to and then people will think something is wrong. For example, if someone is sad, you are supposed to comfort them, and if they start crying, you’re supposed to say certain things and give them a hug. I only know these things in the same way that I know 2 plus 2 equals 4. I don’t feel them. Empathy is not easily accessible to me, and it is most challenging when I’m with the person I’m supposed to empathize with, who is in pain, because all I can think about is the fact that I’m supposed to be doing something, saying something, and these things have to be completely manufactured because I don’t feel them; this makes me feel like a bad person. Nowhere in this fiasco is there room for me to actually try feeling what this person is feeling. That day ended fine. Corrie asked if I had been scared. I said a little. But no one else said anything to me. I wondered if I would get a lecture from someone telling me how I handled the situation right, or wrong. But there was nothing. The memory of the day’s events sat uneasily on my shoulders for a long time. It may have been around that time that I really started to get anxious about doing and saying things that I was expected to do and say, whether or not I felt they were right or not. I wanted people to say I was doing a good job, but even when this happened, I felt on edge about betraying the fact that I was anything but confident about my actions. There were times, though, when I felt even more confident and in control than one of the teachers. I have to admit that instead of feeling sorry for those people in these moments, I only felt pride. It was like a challenge to the thing in my brain that kept telling me I didn’t know what I was doing and that I shouldn’t be there. Sometimes I interpreted people’s looks as their way of saying I wasn’t doing well. There was one behavior tech in particular, named Jessica, who I found very intimidating. She had very short hair and talked with an authority that most of the boys couldn’t match. I respected her very much, but I always felt small and insecure around her, like she could see right through me and knew I was a fraud. Anytime she spoke to me, which were rare occasions, I felt like I was being reprimanded just because of the tone and harshness in the way she would say things. I hate feeling this way and try to avoid it at all cost. Most of the other people that I worked with at Anderson did not make me feel this way. What happened in reality was that all of these feelings of insecurity should have gone away as I continued to be promoted through the first few months of the school year, but they didn’t. I was asked to substitute teach for one of the teachers for a day or two, then it became something of an expectation whenever one of the high school teachers got sick or needed to be gone for a day. The natural progression of making friends with coworkers that was occurring around me with other new hires never got going for me, though there were several teachers I would have loved to befriend. Cameron was the high school English teacher. He had both the largest and most nerdy rooms in the entire school. His walls were covered in video game posters, and he had shelves of books ranging from contemporary fantasy to Shakespeare. He was exceptionally nerdy, exquisite even. I remember the first thing I said to him a few days before school started. I was feeling pretty useless, as all of the teachers were spending their hours setting up their classrooms. I didn’t have to do that, I was just an aide, but I had to be there, and the department manager said some of the scariest words to me I think I’ve ever heard a human being say. She said, “I think it would be good for you to spend the day getting to know the other teachers.” Shit. I remember wandering the high school hallway, asking Corrie, the only teacher I really felt any degree of comfort talking to, if she needed help about three times every 15 minutes. The third time I vaguely sensed some irritation, so I decided not to ask her again...at least for another half hour or so. I walked down the hallway and heard electronic music playing. When I looked inside the classroom, there was Cameron, hanging up a gigantic Assassin’s Creed poster. I asked, “Is there a rave going on in here?” He said something weird in response, “do you want there to be?” Then he turned the music up. I explained how I didn’t really have anything to occupy my time and asked if I could help him do anything. He then assigned me a few menial tasks—ordering books, straightening up shelves, writing a welcome message on the dry erase board. I asked him about the video games on the wall and we began a brief discussion about the best video games ever. He told me he used to play on a pro Halo team. I told him that was fucking cool. And it was. I thought he was cool as shit. He told me he was also the aficionado when it came to electronic music. I told him I was very interested in hearing new electronic music and that some of my favorite electronic music came from stuff like Enigma and Tangerine Dream. He smirked at this and said, “oh, you like ambient.” The beginning of “aaaa”mbient was dragged out as if to state that it was a quaint, if not naïve, introductory interest. I felt he was poking fun, but it was funny, so I laughed. He had an awkward way of speaking, kind of disjointed and nervy sometimes, and this put me a little bit more at ease. I remember that day as being one of the best interactions I’d had at the school thus far. It felt more authentic than usual when it comes to meeting new people. Cameron’s room was also used as one of the lunchroom areas for the kids, including Tyler. As a result, I would spend my lunch time in Cameron’s classroom, keeping an eye on Tyler as he surfed the internet on his laptop. When Cameron had to get up and leave for a few minutes, I would watch the room and vice versa. One day during lunch, Cameron started playing this music. It was melodic with a powerful beat behind it. The chord progressions were haunting. Most of the time during lunch break I would sit quietly, never really speaking to him. But when I heard that music I immediately got up from my chair and asked what that music was. “Simon O’Shine,” he said. “Fairly new to the trance scene but he’s pretty popular.” I said it was beautiful. He told me the name of the song, “Your Distant World.” After school that day, I went into his classroom (I used his charger to charge my walkie, as all of the others were taken) as he was packing up to leave, and we continued some discussion on electronic music. I told him I kind of wanted to get into industrial. Over the next few weeks, we had interspersed conversations about music. I had him look up a couple of songs I’d heard and thought he’d like, as he loved industrial. We usually only talked during lunch break. Sometimes I’d have a few names for him to check out, other times he’d have a suggestion or two for me. I remember one day during that time very well. I was always very shy about talking with him. It was a little easier to talk in the chaos of lunch break because there were kids all over the place talking and playing and I had something of an excuse for not appearing completely focused on the conversation and maintaining eye contact. On this day, though, it was like he could sense that I wanted to talk about music, but because I was so shy, I wouldn’t approach his desk. I just let the conversation rest after a comment or two. A few seconds went by, and then he got up from his desk and came over to me. It was significant somehow. It felt like he could sense me communicating without talking. He immediately started in explaining that he was into a genre called “electronic body music,” or EBM. I remember not being able to contribute much to the conversation because I was anxious about how close he was standing. After a few minutes he went back to his desk, and I felt relieved. But only until the end of the day when I began wishing I would have had the conversation I wanted to have. There would be many times in my life thereafter when I would stop and feel sad about not being friends with someone like that. About not being capable of having friends like that. The hurdle between being acquaintances and being friends is not an easy thing, and I still don’t know how it’s done. A Missed Connection I’ve kept a journal pretty consistently since my first year of high school. My first journal had a big picture of pink pointe shoes covered in roses on the cover, and I received it around the time I started taking pointe ballet classes. My journal today is larger and full of pictures and things taped inside for me to remember events that are important to me. The other day I wrote about a persistent feeling I’ve had for a long time about how even in my own journal, I don’t feel like I can be completely honest because I am always thinking about the possibility of someone I know reading it one day. For example, if I were to die, it seems reasonable that my parents and/or my husband would pick up the journals and read them as a way to remember me. Because of this, I tend to censor the things that I talk about, stopping short of saying anything I feel would be mortifying to someone in my family or embarrassing to myself. But doing this defeats the point when it comes to journal writing. And this made itself very clear to me the other day when I realized there was a large reservoir of pain under the surface of my consciousness. When I have the opportunity to speak about things that have caused me pain in the past, it is like someone is punching a hole in my subconscious, and that pain that I’ve held on to in my memory, pushed far away, starts to leak. And then I feel them. Those things that I never wanted to have to confront again. Embarrassing things, sad things, depressing things, hurtful things. Everyone has them, I know, but it is hard to think of anyone else when you are the one bleeding. There is another reason that I now feel like full disclosure is the right thing in a memoir—I’m writing a whole lot of words on the subject of Asperger’s with the sole intention of reaching people who are either a lot like me or who know nothing about people like me. The most valuable insights I have to offer are the ones most difficult to tell. One of the biggest frustrations I have socially is that I am not very good at communicating how I feel about other people—people that I care about or respect. I don’t like giving people hugs, I don’t like being close physically or emotionally, and when the conversation seems to be getting very personal, I freeze and start back peddling, as if to say “nope, I’m sorry, took a wrong turn there, let’s pretend that didn’t happen.” At other times, not with friends so much but acquaintances mostly, I feel incredibly repulsed by people trying to be familiar with me. It takes me years to start feeling like someone is a friend in the truest sense. There are some feelings of connection that I have never known with anyone other than my brother. When I do meet someone, or even just hear of someone, who I feel I could connect with, I start to talk a lot, if the avenue is opened, and pour out everything in my heart, because somewhere in my mind I believe that saying the right thing will open a door and this person will latch onto it and relate and…finally, someone who understands! It was with these thoughts in mind that I decided to write to Mr. Evans, one of the teachers at Anderson who had been working there for a few years and who had delivered several of the training lectures at the beginning of the summer. He routinely sent encouraging and funny emails to the school faculty every Friday, sometimes including a strange question for us to answer. He often referred to his study of Eastern philosophy, which triggered my own interest from having studied Buddhism in college. I wrote an exceptionally long email in response to one of these quirky questions he’d sent one Friday shortly after the school year had started. In these weekly emails, Mr. Evans would offer some kind of insight about the week and then sometimes he would ask open-ended questions. Several things about Mr. Evans signaled in my mind that perhaps he would be open to conversation about things that no one I knew was interested in or understood. He seemed like an incredibly deep thinker, and I was a little mesmerized. He often quoted famous thinkers, and it seemed like a natural part of his daily rhetoric. He seemed to live and breathe in another dimension that did nothing but appreciate the way people should be living instead of the way they are living. Therefore, after careful consideration, I began a response email to a question regarding what animal we think we would be (and was thankfully smart enough to remember to only respond to sender and not to all recipients). One of the most obvious similarities I saw between us was an appreciation for East Asian culture and philosophy, so I found it appropriate to relate this question to my fascination with a character from a book written by a Japanese author. But after writing my response, I continued writing. I wrote the way I like to write, without being afraid of what he might think because I was already convinced that he would “get it.” And I was happy to find the next day another email from him in response. This one explained that he liked my writing style, and he went on to continue writing in his own way. What was cool was that we weren’t even talking about very specific things. Rather, we wrote around concepts in pretty language that we both liked. I recently checked to see if I could find those emails to remember them better and realized that at some point soon after the correspondences, I had deleted them out of embarrassment or fear that someone else would read them somehow and misunderstand. (It is strange how this ghost of “everyone else” follows me around all the time.) Anyway, the gist is that I continued to respond with long emails as he responded, then suddenly, he just stopped writing…and that was it. I started to think about the things I’d written and what I could have said that would have made him not want to write anymore. There are many very simple, reasonable possibilities. He was busy, had other things going on, had nothing else to say, became bored. But there are other possibilities that I wondered about. Did it make him uncomfortable to read my writing? I remember that in the last email I wrote, I asked about what life was like when he was homeless…this may have been a misunderstanding of something he had said during one of his lectures at training. I thought I’d heard him say that he had spent some time living as a kind of homeless person by his own choice, kind of like a personal journey he took to discover things about himself and the world. After he stopped writing, I wondered, is it fucked up that I would ask about that? Perhaps that’s what did it. Who knows? After having moved around a bit since getting married, I realize that a lot of people seem to be pretty established and comfortable with their lives and friends, and the only pathway to developing more relationships like that is to begin down a long career path, seeing the same people every single day, and letting friendship develop from the mere fact that you are around each other all the time. People either become friends or enemies in the workplace, gossiping as a means of developing camaraderie with those who are more “in.” I always wondered if maybe I had been that person at Anderson. Did people get to know each other that year by talking about that new girl who never seemed to talk to anyone? Comedians say all the time that if you’re trying really hard to figure out who “that person” in your group is and can’t figure it out, it’s probably you. I don’t think there was anyone who outright disliked me, but I certainly didn’t blend in to any degree socially so much as disappear. I could phase in when it was necessary, but I always felt outside of things. Perhaps I could have developed more of that if I’d been able to stay in the high school for the whole year, but it wasn’t to be. Only five months after the school year started, I was asked if I’d like to take over my own classroom in the middle school as a full-time teacher. I felt some pressure, like her tone was suggesting it was the correct thing to do. After all, you’re supposed to work yourself up the ladder, right? I wasn’t supposed to be an aide forever. I might disappoint these people who seemed to think I was pretty good at my job if I say no, I thought. So of course, I said yes. An End and a Beginning The next few months would solidify my feeling of being outside of things, but not because I didn’t want to get to know these people or be friendly. The best way I can describe it is that I simply felt inadequate because it wasn’t natural. I felt like I was lying, and I hate being dishonest with myself. More potent than this is the fear of it being obvious to someone that I’m faking it. Because at that point, people might think I was fundamentally an ingenuine person, that I didn’t care to be honest with people. My new classroom was in a new part of the building with a totally new age group. My students were mostly in the 5th and 6th grade age range, though I’m pretty terrible at being able to tell how old kids are. I was given a mentor for a few weeks to help me adjust to the new responsibilities of being in charge of a classroom. I felt pretty confident, even though I was very nervous. The looseness of the environment was both comforting and intimidating, just like summer camp. The celeration charts for each student lined almost all of the open space on the walls. During the first half of the day, I had eight students. I had a walkie on my hip at all times to talk to behavior support. I didn’t have a lot of issues at first. The kids had been accustomed to the break and reward system and knew how it worked. One young girl in my classroom loved to draw on her charts. I would ask her, “what’s that you’re drawing?” and she would tell me an elaborate story about what she was creating. Another boy had a tendency to put me on edge simply because when anything didn’t go his way, he would immediately get very upset. I would feel it coming on in my gut when I saw him cheat with his testing or give himself extra tries. I gave him a look that said “I saw that.” He would then get really frustrated at being caught, and, depending on the intensity of his behavior, I would have to call in support over the walkie while making sure he didn’t pick up things to throw or try to hit somebody. I followed a curriculum book I was given and made my copies of assignments and such every day. I planned out the day first thing in the morning. Each day began by writing a series of vocabulary words on the board and my anxiety rising to a very high point. I was terrified that a teacher would come in and—gulp—try to talk to me or ask me questions. I constantly worried about whether I was doing everything I needed to be doing and whether I was doing a good job, etc. I wondered because each day was a challenge, and the challenges were always different. They were problem-solving challenges for which I didn’t have a guidebook or a recipe. I had to think on the spot and act based on my training and my own judgment. But I felt like I was being watched and evaluated. When I feel like this, it’s a challenge to even maintain composure and keep from sweating, let alone solve a complex problem. After taking attendance in the morning, the kids would get out some paper after filling out their reward tracking sheets. They would write down their best guesses at what each word meant, then we would discuss these as a class. Once I caught my stride in the mornings, I felt a little bit better, but I was still constantly on edge about upsetting one of the kids or coming up against something I couldn’t handle. I’d seen other teachers in the hallway handle extreme behaviors, and I wondered if I would be able to handle things just as well. I constantly worried about what the other teachers thought about me and the job I was doing. This classroom had gone through three teachers within a year and a half, I was told. I felt good about being able to engage with the kids on “good” days. Those moments when I got a big grin and giggling from the young girl in the classroom who had to put up with a room full of boys. More often than not, I had the kids’ attention and was able to be entertaining with my examples and demonstrations of each word. I constantly told them when they were doing a good job and was positive in my reinforcement every time I had an opportunity. I would go over what we were doing each day in order to have everything structured for them. I could tell when someone was getting antsy that we needed to transition to get back on track. In the afternoons, the kids moved to a different room and I had a new class for math, which lasted the rest of the day. This afternoon class was smaller, only five or six boys. The afternoons would present yet a different kind of challenge. In the mornings, the most stressful moments came from when I had a disagreement with a student about reward minutes, or what was and wasn’t allowed for break time. The kids were all mostly respectful and appreciated that I was the teacher and that I was in charge. The afternoon kids were a bit older, and there were a few different kinds of distraction. Two of the students seemed to work together as ring leaders of chaos. They didn’t seem to particularly struggle academically, but they were instead quite bored with the subject matter and didn’t really care to put much effort into class. When I first met them, they gave no hint that they were planning to wreak havoc on the classroom, which make it rather upsetting when they began showing their true colors. And because the Anderson behavioral code enforced a no-punishment policy, I simply felt powerless when the boys decided they didn’t want anything to do with math class that day. I could reinforce those students who chose to work, but I could not exactly send anyone to a principal’s office or send them out of the room, as one of them in particular would have simply wandered around the building or gone to hang out in the playground. This particular young man was a little intimidating, as he was a good several inches taller than myself. The most challenging part was the fact that it had been made clear from the start that these boys may have felt resentful at the mere fact that they had to be there. This taller boy, I’d learned from the program director, had been living a pretty difficult life up to that point in regard to his home life. I tried to imagine how it would feel to be placed in a school that was not “normal,” and which many people considered a school for “special” people. Perhaps they felt ashamed, embarrassed, or simply unhappy. But whatever the reasons, this boy and his cohorts simply refused to participate without somehow bargaining in terms of reward time, which was pretty much my only bargaining tool. And when I tried to assert my position as the teacher or make it clear that I was not going to bargain with them the way they wanted, one or two would become very irritated. Some days the tables would end up overturned, many computer screens would be broken over the next few months, and more than a few sheets of paper torn up and thrown around the room. I became less and less able to cope with the situation as the quarter progressed, and I was very much at a loss for what to do. What do you do when you ask a student to get out their math workbooks and they simply ignore you and continue talking with another kid? Or get up and kick one of the desks for no reason? The foundation of the school’s practice for handling in-classroom behavior was to ignore the problem behavior and praise the good behavior. This works well enough with younger children most of the time, but these kids were teenagers. They didn’t care if Jimmy was being praised for opening that workbook and starting the assignment. It soon devolved into a situation where I was getting these kids to do what they were told with “rewards” like free time in the recess area. Even cash was suggested! The line between “positive reinforcement” as described in pre-summer ABA training and bribing became thinner and thinner the longer I worked in this classroom. The behavioral problems extended beyond not doing classwork. The tall boy would make sexually inappropriate drawings and comments constantly because it got a reaction from the others. And I felt I could do absolutely nothing about it. It took all my strength to pretend that they weren’t bothering me, because I was terrified that if I let on that they were getting to me, they would get much worse. At one of my first breaking points, I simply smiled in exasperation as he threw balls of paper at me, aiming to get them to fall down the front of my shirt. One morning this student brought in a strange-looking glass bottle. It looked like one of those Starbucks Frappuccino things you can buy at the store, but the label was missing, and the liquid inside definitely didn’t look like coffee. He bragged to the others in the room about getting it in the school, not hiding it at all from me. I told him to hand it to me immediately, which he did. I took the cap off, smelled it, then called behavior tech. The smell of alcohol nearly knocked me off my feet. After finally getting up the courage to talk to the program director, she decided the best idea was to separate the two ringleaders into different classrooms in the afternoons. Some of the comments I was getting from the tall student in particular were incredibly inappropriate, and I was well on my way to having an emotional breakdown. I would come home and relay these experiences to my husband, crying on the floor in his office, and he would note the complete turnaround that had occurred between when I started at Anderson and now. At first, I felt that I was doing some good, and it felt satisfying to go to work and feel like I was really doing something to improve these kids’ lives and future outlooks. Even though it was a challenge for me, I was getting more and more confident with the high school environment at Anderson. But my situation after accepting the “promotion” was completely different. I felt like things were out of my control, and I was suffering every day with the most intense anxiety I’d ever felt. The separation of the afternoon class helped a bit, but the greater realities of my situation were beginning to dawn on me. As stressful as those afternoons were, I can honestly say they were nothing compared to the few minutes of intense anxiety I had to experience every single morning when I’d first arrive at the school before even getting settled in my classroom. It was the long, dreadful hallway. Each morning, the teachers would get ready for their day, and then they would stand outside their rooms, waiting to greet the kids. It sounds absurd even as I describe it now, but I just didn’t know how to fucking do that. Each morning, I would make my copies and get my room ready. Then I would wait for the time when the teachers were gathering outside their classrooms at 8 am, chatting about their days and their plans for the weekend. At this time, I would grab the dry-erase markers and begin writing all of the vocabulary words for first period on the board—very, very slowly. As my kids came into the room, I would greet them and take on the role of attentive teacher. Now, I simply didn’t have time to go hang out outside in the hallway. I reiterate: This was the worst aspect of that entire employment experience—not knowing how to stand in the hallway and socialize. I’d started the position as a full-time teacher in September of that year. The teacher whose room I was covering had gotten hit in the head and was taking some time off to recover. I was told it would be a temporary thing. And when I asked if I would be covering through the holidays, the answer was a simple “yes.” In my mind, that meant that the regular teacher would be back to take over his classroom sometime after the new year, and I would take on the responsibilities of a substitute teacher, hopefully getting to cover some high school rooms now and then to see the kids I was now beginning to miss very much. But this wasn’t to be. The holidays came and went. January began to creep by. Occasionally the teacher would come by the room to say hi. (He looked fine to me.) But each time I asked what the time frame was for my returning to substitute teaching, the answer was always noncommittal. Eventually, the combination of challenges and anxieties I was facing each day wore me down. It got to the point in February where each and every afternoon and evening after school was overshadowed by thoughts of the next day, and then the next day. Thoughts of living through the next morning and the next ate away at me and I became incredibly unhappy. The boys in the afternoon had been split up, but it wasn’t enough to make me any more comfortable. Not only was I facing the challenge of teaching a classroom full of kids with autism and behavior issues, but I was incapable of engaging with whatever support network I had there. All of the teachers seemed to be good friends, and I was completely intimidated. I felt I had no place there. And in early March, I abruptly quit. T Chapter 3: Therapy and a Diagnosis here are a lot of emotions, and what later on could only be termed “baggage,” that came out of my experience with Anderson. I had some fond memories there, but most of them are still shadowed by the traumatic experiences of those last few months. It makes me feel ashamed when I start to recount the idea that I felt genuinely abused in that classroom by the boys, because it’s not supposed to happen that way. The fact that I was the adult and he was the child meant that I was supposed to be impermeable and steadfast, immune to the inappropriate behavior and being made fun of and embarrassed constantly. It doesn’t matter that he was actually several inches taller than me. His anger scared me. The embarrassment I went through in that classroom scarred me. And the fact that I was supposed to be an adult and essentially “immune” to such things shamed me. All of these things feel rather permanent. I did not become aware of how deeply the anxiety and trauma of that “failure” at Anderson had seated itself in my subconsciousness until several months later. I’d quickly needed to find another job, but I could not bring myself to go back to a coffee shop. I knew I couldn’t handle retail, either. I looked at a job on craigslist for Magic Maids and thought about it… my days would leave me pretty much to my own devices; cleaning, doing something physical, not having to talk to anyone really…sounds amazing. I was hired on the spot and began work the next day. I trained with a few different women over the course of a week, and then I was asked to begin cleaning homes solo. I was a little nervous at the first one, but I soon became more comfortable, and I absolutely loved the freedom I had. Of course, I had to report to work at a certain time, get to my appointments on time, and do a good job. But I could drive and listen to my music, stop and get a latté whenever I wanted, some lunch here or there. After a while I started accruing “regulars” whose homes I would go to on a regular basis, either weekly, biweekly, or monthly. Some of these I really enjoyed; others, I dreaded. The job brought back memories of that first time I put on the Starbucks apron and felt like a “servant.” I was “underneath” people again, and the disgusting t-shirt and off-color khaki pants I came home in every day were a constant reminder of that. I’m sure we weren’t looked down upon by all our clients, though it felt like it most of the time. I was ok with it to a large degree. I enjoyed the fact that I could disappear and be nobody to people. At the same time, engaging in conversations with clients when they were home while I cleaned (I hated that) made me feel a bit embarrassed. It was hard to feel like an equal talking to the person in whose home I was scrubbing toilets and gross shower doors. Sometimes I felt pity radiating from these clients’ eyes. Whether it was just my perception or for real, I’ll never really know, I guess. But this upset me in addition to feeling a little embarrassed. In the end, I never went the anger route. In most of the disappointments or negative situations in my life, the emotions funnel down into the sadness/shame category as a default instead of anger or deflection. My interpretation of this tendency is that what lurks on that side of my emotional spectrum is way too intense to even contemplate going there. I’ve never learned or found a good “outlet” for anger and so instead of going there, I default to the sadness where I can rather fall deeper into the cyclone of self-deprecation. Because for me, to assuage the anger impulse would probably require hurting someone else physically, and that is not an option! So instead, I turned to hurting myself mentally. I told myself I was a servant, that I wasn’t good enough to do anything better than cleaning people’s nasty homes. I couldn’t handle an “adult” job where I was offered a salaried position because I was too emotional and weak. I had been coddled my whole life and now I couldn’t handle it. And on and on. What I struggled with most was trying to figure out why I was this way. Why I couldn’t mesh with people in everyday conversation, why anxiety overpowered me whenever I opened my mouth to speak, especially with more than one person listening. Why, after months of working with someone, someone who I actually really liked, couldn’t I become friends with them? Why did it happen so naturally for everyone around me, but not for me? In the summer of 2015, work became busier and busier. I hated going to brand new clients’ homes or one-time cleans because those homes were usually the absolute worst. I will spare you the details of some of the things I saw. But a part of me was also very satisfied after getting a difficult job done. At the very least, it felt very good to be doing some physical work each day. I also had some rare treats every few weeks when I got to go to one of the fancy houses north of town. I would describe my favorite house as some kind of Victorian museum. This was my favorite house for a few reasons. One of them is that I always went there on Fridays. There was no cleaning on the weekends, so I would already be in a good mood. Second, the house was spotless before I ever even got to the door. It really seemed like the house was barely even lived in, much less in need of professional cleaning. But hey, I didn’t complain! It was easy work. The third, and most significant, reason I loved this house was because there was a gorgeous shiny black grand piano in the foyer. Since the cleaning itself barely took any time, I would always take around 20 minutes just to sit and play to my heart’s content (the homeowner was never there). The thing was so beautiful. I was able to handle anxiety in this scenario most of the time because my actual contact with customers was minimal. And even when the clients were home, they would usually make a point to clear the way and not disturb the maids. I was not making much money, but my husband and I both had long conversations about how I was entering a transition and that I would figure things out soon. I really wasn’t sure what I wanted to do next. I knew I certainly didn’t want to clean houses forever. But through the summer and into fall I had the pleasure of finishing fairly early almost every day, around 2 pm, and then I would usually go straight to my favorite park to jog or walk. I never tasted depression that summer, this aspect would only begin sinking in as the weather turned cold. I’d experienced some degree of depression during the winter every year for probably five or six years, but it would always lighten once the weather got warmer, around March or April. And it wouldn’t be constant. It was more like a day here and there that was very tough to trudge through, and those days would get closer together than usual. That fall, as I continued with Magic Maids, I also started to really try to address my anxiety. I had had several months to think about why I had to leave Anderson and the experiences that had led me to doubt my overall soundness when it came to social skills and fitting in to a work environment that wasn’t completely black and white. I was covered under my husband’s insurance to go see a therapist, so I decided this was something I wanted to try. The first time I walked into the therapist’s office, I felt nervous and uncomfortable. I questioned whether or not I really belonged there, but a part of me deep down knew that I did. When my name was called, I went back to talk to Kathy, a lovely, outgoing woman in her mid-40s. We began talking and I was instantly uncomfortable. Something about her energy was stressing me out and I couldn’t quite put my finger on it. I was very grateful when she recognized it. Mostly because after a few minutes of explaining my problems with anxiety, I started to cry. And it was a real cry, something that I’d never imagined I could do in front of a complete stranger! This confirmed that maybe the energy I was receiving from her was a little bit too much for me to handle. She was a very good therapist, and she quickly picked up on my discomfort. She said she wasn’t offended, and that it had actually happened to her before. She also had a suggestion for a different therapist who she believed would be a better fit. I thanked her as I wiped my eyes with a couple of tissues and repeated “I’m sorry” about a hundred times. A few minutes after arriving that day, I walked out with another appointment card to see a new therapist, Monica. When I came back the next week and met Monica, I realized that she was definitely more my speed. I’d established the week before with Kathy that I struggled constantly with anxiety, and I reviewed the gist of the conversation with Monica. She was very subtle and unassuming. I was not intimidated at all, and this made it possible for me to speak more openly about the things I wanted to talk about. Her method with me was a lot of question and answer searching, where I would find answers to my own questions and analyze the “why” behind each one. As we talked about how debilitating my anxiety was, she asked if I would want to try out an antidepressant, and I agreed. I had never been on any serious drug therapy in my life, and I had no idea if it would help, but I figured it was worth a try. I knew that at some point, I would need to move out from the comfort of Magic Maids and pursue some kind of career path that at least had the potential to make me feel satisfied and fulfilled, if that even existed for me. A week or two into therapy, I came out with a prescription for Prozac, a very low dose. I was a little embarrassed to take it in to the pharmacist, but I had come this far, so why would I back out now? I liked Monica and trusted her, at least a little. The first few days of taking Prozac were uneventful, I don’t remember the exact point at which I could really acknowledge that I was feeling the effect of the drug. I feel like it happened smoothly and slowly, and after two weeks of taking the drug, I was hit with a bittersweet realization: I felt nothing. I had gone through one or two social gatherings on the drug and noticed that I was not feeling the anxiety that I usually did. But I was also not behaving any differently. Being on the drug did not seem to activate social abilities that had been hidden underneath anxiety all along. Instead, free from the anxiety that had always been there during social interactions, I was simply unbothered by the fact that I was not socializing and still didn’t give a shit about most of the things people talked about when our group of friends got together. I still felt an aversion to looking people in the eyes and I usually angled my body in such a way that I was not directly confronting them when I spoke. I just kind of melted into the background, taking in the words I heard but unable to involve myself in them or respond to any meaningful degree. This was a bit of an eye-opener, as I learned what it was like to experience social interactions without the overwhelming anxiety, even if the experience was still far from intuitive for me to navigate. After a few more weeks, I began hating the feeling of being on Prozac and feeling like a “zombie” all the time. I was not experiencing the highs and lows that were part of my natural cycle of emotions. I was not getting excited about anything, at any time, and this was equal to death for me. I would rather have felt depressed than nothing at all at the time, though I had yet to experience the worst my depression had to offer. I thought on this for a day or two, then decided to stop taking the antidepressant. It really was not the effect I wanted, though I do feel like I learned a great deal about myself from taking them. I explained to Monica how I felt about the drug and she completely accepted my feelings on the matter. Instead of dealing with anxiety that way, we engaged in mental strategies that really required me to think through the situations in which I felt anxiety rising. In this way, it was more of a presence of mind meditation leading the way through the therapy. I would start practicing how to change my mindset before and after events that made me nervous and anxious. But there was a constant in all of these experiences that had nothing to do with anxiety, and this was when I began to be curious about my own relationship with autism/Asperger’s syndrome. When I first started at Anderson, I went through all kinds of online streaming libraries for documentaries on autism and Asperger’s. I wanted to know where the research was going, what had been discovered in the past few decades, etc. When I read the descriptions of people with Asperger’s, the lightbulbs started going on in my head and I took several online tests over and over again to see how closely I fit. I fit pretty damn well. After speaking with Monica about it, she referred me to a psychologist, and I made an appointment right away. Within a few weeks of conversations and a very long test, the psychologist told me that she believed I was not only on the right track with my Asperger’s suspicions, but that my tests revealed a really high level of depression. I remember hearing her say this. My reaction was completely deadpan and unsurprised. It had been a given that I was depressed, and it was cyclic, but I’d found strategies to manage it. It wasn’t something I viewed (and still don’t) like an illness that demands a cure right away. Because there is nothing out there that “cures” depression right away. In my mind, through going to therapy, researching, and doing things for my health, I was treating my depression in the best way possible without lying to myself for the sake of personal comfort (i.e., nothing is your fault, you’ve been a victim, everything happens for a reason). When I left the psychologist’s office that day, I felt a mixture of satisfaction and trepidation at the knowledge that I wasn’t just latching on to something that kind of seemed right. There was now an explanation for a lot of the things I had struggled with throughout my life, and the reasons were not that I was a cold person, incapable of connecting with people because I just didn’t care. I really wanted to feel other people, and still do, but there is a barrier that is prevalent in every social encounter I have, whether it is with my husband, my friends or my own family. The eye contact that is so uncomfortable for me is something I trained myself to do in a kind of moderation. I would never want to be an embarrassment for someone else, the thought alone is mortifying. When someone says something, or my husband says something, that I find rude or hurtful and stupid, I don’t speak my mind because I’ve learned how people respond to openness. They encourage it on the outside and superficially, but in reality, no one wants to hear your opinion of them or what they are saying if it isn’t a glowing review. After an Asperger’s diagnosis, my sensitivities now made more sense. Many tactile sensations are acutely uncomfortable; I am always feeling too warm or too cold. In the winter, my only refuge is in a hot shower, which only lasts a few minutes. In the summer, I have an easier time giving in to the heat if I pointedly go outside and immerse myself in it, like running in the park, but sleep and relaxation are tricky during the summer because once it cools down, I’m then too cold. Sudden noises and noises that stick out in the background have the power to terrify me senseless until I pinpoint them. Visually, there are several conditions in which it is dangerous for me to drive a car. I can’t see very well at night. I can’t distinguish between the glow and glare of streetlights and the light coming off of different sources and the markings on the road. Everything feels like it is assaulting my visual field and I don’t feel like I can process what I’m seeing quickly. I can manage it, because I’ve had no choice, but it is incredibly stressful for me, and I usually get lots of people honking or hitting the gas impatiently as they whiz by me to pass. Driving in the rain at night…don’t even get me started! All of these complexities are a big part of why I’m writing my story down. There are many things I feel I can’t explain in a way that is clear and relatable because only people who have experienced the same thing know exactly what it’s like. As I’m writing, I imagine someone on the spectrum reading this and thinking, “yeah, I get it.” It’s really all I’ve ever wanted. PART II: Return to Innocence M Chapter 4: Early Obsessions y first memories which I consider part of my emergence as the person I am today include my 7-year-old self saying the words, “don’t lose this,” very quietly, as a request to myself at that time and in the future. I had probably started to recognize that there were some differences between myself and the adults around which I spent a lot of time. They didn’t seem very present, they didn’t get super excited about much, their focus seemed to always be on days, weeks, or years from now. I never wanted to become that; it was a genuine fear (still is), and so I was determined to never let go of the most precious aspects of being a child. The second memory is the day I saw an Irish dance show on TV called The Lord of the Dance, which was released in 1996. When I was around ten years old, waiting on my parents to get ready so we could attend a funeral, I caught a scene from the show where Michael Flatley is putting back together a broken penny whistle for a little girl dressed all in glittery gold. He was dressed all in black, with leather pants and leather adornments, including thick leather bracers with trails of leather tassels hanging from each, and a thin black leather headband around a head of curly blond hair. There are several visual and aural aspects which triggered this obsession, the development of which in my mind form some of the core characteristics of the music which continue to trigger a strong emotional response. The music in the show, composed by Ronan Hardiman, is filled with beautiful chord progressions and linger in minor keys that reflect and highlight oftentimes sad melodies. The sounds themselves are otherworldly in several acts, such as “Celtic Dream,” which uses a haunting chorus of voices that sound like ghosts alongside strange, evolving ethereal pads…the effect for me as a child was enough to haunt the rest of my life. I think it is interesting how just that one scene that I was able to glimpse before being rushed out of the house to attend that funeral was enough to motivate me to hunt down what it was I saw. Somehow, I figured it out, got the VHS, which came in one of those oversized protective cases, and proceeded to watch the show obsessively. Each viewing fulfilled a complete emotional journey and fascination, even if I watched it twice back to back. I couldn’t get enough of it. I wanted to hear that music over and over again. I wanted to hear the rhythm of the hard shoe dances as it soothed everything else out of existence in my head. I wanted to watch the tall, thin, beautiful dancers with their thick, curly hair dancing around like perfect porcelain dolls. There was even a story to follow alongside the hero, the Lord of the Dance, as he battled to retain his title against the evil Lord. He falls in love with the beautiful Saoirse, becomes tempted by Morrighan, and ultimately defeats the evil Don Dorcha with the help of the Little Spirit, whom he rescued earlier. Soon, I was begging my mother to find a studio where I could take Irish dance lessons. I also became obsessed with Ireland and everything about it. I collected picture books filled with giant images of the Emerald Isle and all of its most historic and popular tourist sites. I learned about the Celts and even took on a short-lived quest to learn the ancient language of Gaelic. My mother called a studio nearby, but they did not offer Irish dance lessons. There was no one in the area who did, many had never even heard of the discipline. However, said one of the teachers at my first dance studio, tap is the precursor to learning Irish, and we definitely teach that! I went from taking tap dance class my first year to adding jazz and ballet soon thereafter. I loved it all. While I continued to pursue my Irish dance dream, there were a few things in my life that started to manifest and which would stay with me through the rest of my life. The “7-year-old promise” was the first. The second, a discovery of Ireland, Irish dance, and the mystique of the show The Lord of the Dance. One day somewhere in this time frame I somehow walked out of a local music store with a CD. The title was “Pure Moods.” This would become one of the most profound and influential experiences of my life. On this CD were several tracks compiled as a sort of “best of” new age music, a genre that was new to me. I think I probably picked it up after hearing a sample of one of the pretty piano tracks, or maybe I was interested in the inclusion of the “X-Files Theme” or “Tubular Bells” which was the title track of a movie I was definitely not allowed to see and which my father always said scared the crap out of him (The Exorcist). Whatever the reason, one track in particular, which I was soon to discover, is a track that I believe shaped my taste and feel of music to an enormous degree. It is track one on the CD, Enigma’s “Return to Innocence.” The track begins with a strange chanting and low-end strings. In retrospect, those strings trigger a familiarity with the beginning track of The Lord of the Dance, “Return of the Celts.” In the show, the camera spans across a dark stage lit by gently glowing blue lights and torches carried by hooded figures in black masks. The strings are accompanied by an eerie dark chorus and the music evolves from there to include the Irish melody on a penny whistle and fiddle. The rhythms are highlighted by the music, but the hard, percussive elements are predominantly led by the hard shoe footwork. In Enigma’s track, the drum track is subtle but persistent layered underneath the stringed chords and pads. The chords unfold in a motion that resembles breath in groups of four. These chords present themselves slowly and in even time, the chord progressions opening with a soaring congruence, then falling on the third and fourth beat or just the fourth beat, then resolving back to soaring alongside a percussive accent. The strange melody of the chorus gives over completely to the Native American voice that seems to be tossed into the air and moved around on the support of the chord progressions. The trance-like effect of the steady and unchanging 4/4 beat underneath slow chord progressions that present, drop to a minor, then resolve above and beyond the first is something that my brain seems to actively search for in nearly every kind of music I am introduced to. That elements of chord progression carries me down before rising upward, offering a feeling of being uplifted, and it always hits me deepest. Alternatively, music that drops me into the “melancholy” or “sad-sounding” minor keys and wallows there is also incredibly effective on me. I think this has a lot to do with the overall “dark” feel of The Lord of the Dance, especially in those first few minutes where the music and visual made such a profound impression. Following this devastating track were others in which I was also easily able to lose myself. Tracks like Deep Forest’s “Lullaby,” “Crocket’s Theme,” and Enigma’s “Sadeness” still give me chills. When I was sure no one was going to catch me, I would dress up in my mother’s old ‘80s style dresses and dance in the living room as the CD played in my boombox. The lights would be off, and I would be transported onto a square stage, surrounded by people on all sides. I feel like this particular ritual started very early, I’m not sure, but I do know that I continue this ritual of dancing to this day. Dancing was a kind of meditation, even back then, though my mind was at peace through imagining my dance holding onlookers awe-struck. To this day, Amber, whom I wrote about at the beginning of this book, is the only person who has experienced this meditation alongside me. At night, when I couldn’t dance, I could listen on my CD player and imagine that stage again. The stage itself took on many different shapes and looks over the years. But soon my dance would take on magical qualities as well. I could conjure fire or electricity at the points in the music where the chords come together for a climax of sound, usually just before the first chorus. This may have been influenced by my fascination with a TV show that came on back in the mid-1990s called “World’s Greatest Magic.” The show featured magicians like Lance Burton, the Pendragons, and Jeff McBride. As I got older, I began observing and mimicking the girls around me who I wanted to be like. I got in to the band Hanson around eighth grade just because my friend Heather did, and she was pretty and cool. I went to sleepovers. I rode around on bikes with older friends who had switched schools, but this never lasted too long. I was never “connected at the hip” with anyone after Amber. I don’t ever remember getting very excited about going over to Heather’s house, which was just a few blocks away. Though we did have fun and we made up dances to Brittany Spears and danced around her basement. I think my main interest was focused on the structure of going to dance classes and performing well. I’d stood out in class from the beginning, picking up on steps quickly and executing them with very good rhythm. I think listening to the perfect rhythm of the Irish dancers had a lot to do with this. I didn’t have to practice at home to get better. I just remembered how to do everything from week to week. This left me with plenty of time to watch The Lord of the Dance over and over and over… I have a memory from recess in middle school that just has “Aspie” written all over it. I was in recess in the gymnasium with a bunch of other kids. It must have been the whole middle school classes (which at my very small private school may have been around 30 kids). I am circling around the border of that circle that is painted in the middle of basketball courts. Kids are playing basketball on either side of me, some kids with jump ropes over there, others playing dodgeball over there, chasing each other around, etc. But I was completely in a different world, walking like Erin the Goddess from Lord of the Dance during her first vocal performance in the show which is a song called “Suil a Ruin.” The song includes some Gaelic, and I had no idea what it meant, but I’d listened to the song so much I could emulate what the words sounded like as Erin the Goddess sang them. I embodied her on that stage and walked around that circle singing that song to myself, just enough so I could hear myself over all the noise going on around me. I must have looked so strange! I still think it’s amazing I didn’t get bowled over by a boy dribbling a basketball or hit in the face by a dodgeball. Though these specific obsessions are among the most powerful I’ve ever experienced, I did not yet have the sensation of a “painful obsession.” To be painfully obsessed requires a partial presence outside of that obsession to recognize the separation and impossibility of merging completely with the source. This wasn’t my reality at that age. I was Erin the Goddess on stage whenever I wanted to be, I was the Temptress gliding across the stage in her sparkly red dress. I had been completely consumed and swallowed up by these alternate realities. It is difficult to describe now, especially as an adult, to other adults. But that part of me that swore never to let go of the child inside has been mostly successful in this endeavor—it’s just that it’s no longer acceptable for me to lose myself completely and merge totally into my obsessions, both because of the practicality that comes with adulthood that helps you to define your limitations in life, at times over pronounced, and also the awareness of a now-crowded life full of obligations that don’t allow for that intensity of focus over a long period of time. I can be there when I dance, but this is, of course, very short term. I was so immersed in becoming a dancer that hardly anything else was remotely interesting to me. I did not look forward to a birthday party on the weekend. I just wanted to relive my show and listen to Enigma. I always wanted to be in that reality and was nearly crushed when this was threatened sometime in the middle of fourth or fifth grade. I had been at a sleepover with a friend, and of course the VHS copy of Lord of the Dance went everywhere with me, even if I wasn’t going to watch it. I brought a suitcase that belonged to my parents with me to school the following morning and it had several items of clothing, my VHS, and a stuffed animal, a teddy bear. During recess, one of the boys in my class got into it, as I’d left it in the classroom. Word got around to me that someone’s things had been discovered by the boys and they’d seen my underwear! I was so mortified, I never went to the office to retrieve the suitcase from the lost and found box. I’m not sure what I told my parents, but for a while I was without my VHS tape, and I had to rely entirely on my Pure Mood CDs and a few other CDs to keep me company until I could get another copy. No one ever figured out who the suitcase belonged to. I was very removed from the people in my class, to the extent that even something so personally defining as this show I loved so much was completely unknown to any of my peers. If I had ever talked to them about my love for Irish dance, they would have figured it out immediately. As I moved from fifth grade up into seventh and eighth, I only became further removed from personal friendships and my life began to revolve around the comfortable structure of dance classes. At every single class, when the teacher gave us a couple of minutes to rest, the girls in my class would congregate to each other in different groups and immediately start talking about whatever was happening in their lives; the new cute boy in class, what N’SYNC was doing now, etc. I always found a spot alone on the bench, and I hated that class had to be interrupted for this. I think I complained to my mother several times about how so much time could be wasted as the teachers stopped class to let the girls talk and relax all the time. This was a dance class! We’re here to work! Also, what the heck was I supposed to be doing during these breaks? It felt awkward, and I would often pretend I needed to go to the restroom or go upstairs to the drinking fountain so I didn’t have to sit there doing nothing. I was conscious of the fact that it was weird for me to do that, but I also had no faculty to engage with the other girls in my class. Around May of each year, the dance studio would host a giant dance recital that would last for days…ok, maybe not days, around three hours. Looking back, my parents must have been so bored sometimes. Luckily, though, by eighth grade I was taking so many classes that the night’s program would have my performances dotted all over the place from the beginning to end. The stage was one place in my life where everything felt correct. It is a perfect structure. There is a routine to execute, there is no talking, no discussion about how to do something, no verbal communication whatsoever. You communicate to an audience through the movement of your body and enjoyment of the music in time. People can either appreciate what’s going on or they can ignore you and play on their phones, but it doesn’t matter. It never really mattered to me. I knew I could do this well. I could excel in this particular art form. At that point I’d lost the ability to sing or speak in front of an audience, but I never had trouble moving my body and performing dance steps. I used to sing with my mother in church, but at some point, I tried to open my mouth to sing by myself in front of a group of people and it just…wasn’t there. My mother was always encouraging, both of my parents were. They were also incredibly supportive of my dance dreams. I cringe to think of all the money flying around for dance classes, costumes, shoes, etc. I feel lucky that I had this talent because I know a lot of people on the spectrum struggle with physical coordination and balance in space. I’ve always been very aware of my body in space. And although I was proud of my dancing abilities, I was also approaching a time when I was noticing how my body looked different from the bodies of the girls in my class, and it would soon take hold the way it unfortunately does for a gigantic portion of teenage girls in the US. I was bigger. I was always one of the biggest girls in my classes. For a while when I first got started, it didn’t matter because I was pretty good, and as long as you’re good at it, you can be a professional dancer, right? Things weren’t quite looking the same as I prepared to graduate from my tiny private middle school and move into the big bad high school realm. I realized, especially as I thought about moving up into a pointe ballet class, that my body wasn’t really the same size and shape as everyone else’s. It never destroyed my ambition to become a dancer in those young days, I just remember becoming more and more aware of the differences as I got older. I think that had a lot to do with the constant support and praise I got from my teachers and parents. They certainly didn’t seem to think it mattered that I was a little bigger. So everything was fine. I was going into high school, maybe I’d even be a cheerleader—the pinnacle of a girl’s teenage American Dream. W Chapter 5: The Game of High School ell, when my mom and I went in to register for classes, the cheerleading tryouts had already finished. “But the color guard is down in the gym holding tryouts right now if you’re interested.” Color guard? What the hell was that? The counselor described a little about it, and it sounded like they did some dancing, so I said sure. We went down to the gymnasium and I did some across-the-floors, jazz walks/runs, some sashés and turns. Then I was introduced to the flag and taught how to do drop-spins and a few other basics. I was in. Cool. I was eager to be a part of a competitive team that incorporated the things I was good at. I learned about how they competed with the marching band in the summer and then did an indoor show all their own and brought it to competitions through the winter. I was also still dancing, though I’d moved to a different studio in a neighboring town that actually taught Irish dancing! It was a huge step in my Irish dancing career, though at that point I’d learned that there was a whole other world of traditional Irish dancing that entailed wigs and large heavy dresses and poodle socks, but I wasn’t quite there yet. Cindy promised she could teach me all the basics, and she was absolutely right about that. My high school career started off well. I was able to participate in the summer marching band season with the color guard the summer before I started high school, so I knew the girls from my team and lots of band members. From that summer, it was clear that the band room and marching band would be the center of my high school experience. I am still so very happy that I missed those cheerleading tryouts. I had all these structured, competitive activities going on outside of school that it made any kind of socialization in school quite irrelevant. And I was completely content with this. The exceptions were events like football games and dances because I loved to capitalize on any chance I could get to dress up pretty and show off. It really wasn’t about spending time with friends, it was about being present and seen. This truly did not seem strange to me at all. I was constantly performing, all the time. I enjoyed playing the part of the shy new girl in school. I enjoyed the occasional attention from boys in band. I enjoyed showing off my flag skills when we learned a drill chart that placed me in front of the horn section, or the drums, or whatever. I didn’t have to talk to them. I got to perform in front of them. And this is how I communicated who I was. I had the girls on my color guard team, especially the older ones, to observe and emulate to try and be cool and funny like them. When I wasn’t with them, I was a very quiet student who always sat at the back and was terrified of being asked a question or to speak in front of everyone. Teachers liked me because I worked hard and did well, but I remember seeing how they interacted with lots of the other students like they were buddies and in a strange way I felt it was wrong. To me there was a clear delineation between teacher and student. When the teacher is done teaching, they retreat to a corner and prepare for the next lesson as the kids assemble their things and head to their next classes. To see some of the kids stopping and joking around with the teachers after class was incredibly weird to me. I thought, why are the teachers acting like children? Is that okay? Anytime a teacher had a friendly word for me outside of class I’d quickly respond appropriately then abruptly leave. A month into my freshman year of high school in 2001, I was sitting in the auditorium taking some kind of standardized test when I heard the auditorium doors open quickly and someone walking down the aisle closest to me. This teacher approached the supervising instructor at the front near the stage and whispered something to her. This was followed by a gasp and some continued whispering. After the tests were complete and I returned to my classroom, I was informed along with the class that something terrible had happened in New York. All of the TVs were on, and for the longest time everyone sat and watched in silence. Eventually the day resumed, and I wrote about the experience in my very first journal. It took a while for the events of 9/11 to become clear in my mind, and I wrote a little memorial paragraph at the front of my journal about it. It was largely a reflection of my parents’ patriotism and the programs that were on constantly in our house or on the radio. I was young and naïve, and I felt very little personally about the situation and wondered why this was more tragic than the same thing happening all over the world in other countries all the time that I never heard about or saw emotion for except from stoic reporters on the news. My pointe shoes arrived that fall, and I remember thinking they were the most beautiful things I’d ever seen in my life thus far. My first journal was bought at the dance store where my mother ordered them and featured a pair of pink pointe shoes surrounded by roses on the front. This journal would be the first in a long line of journals that I’ve kept up to this day. I now consider them my most precious possessions. It is amazing how much we can forget about our lives and the little memories that helped shape us growing up. There is just too much going on as we get older and it takes the place of those moments long ago that at the time were the center of our worlds. The first several pages of this journal are, of course, dedicated to my love for dance and my active pursuit of becoming a professional touring Irish dancer with the show Lord of the Dance. I’d come a long way and was now learning a lot of the steps that I’d watched hundreds of times on my little TV/VHS player combo. But now my schedule was filled with even more performances and competitions through color guard and also show choir (because hey, they dance too!). I had little free time to myself and that time was dedicated either to watching my VHS tapes or singing to Amy Grant tapes I’d gotten from my mom. When I got “dolled” up and went out to a football game or a school dance, I pretended to be in a movie and felt like I always had people watching me. Every move I made and word I said was always calculated, no matter who I was talking to. It all added up to this persona that I believe I’d started forming in middle school, mostly modeled after my friend Heather, who was always the coolest and most popular. The boys all liked her, and she was thin and pretty. I wanted to be her, so in high school, I did the best I could to do just that. She had mannerisms that I emulated, things that I struggled with on my own, like how to stand and hold my head and what to do with my hands while I was listening to someone else speak. I was terrified to go anywhere alone when it came to social events. If I had no one to go to a dance with, I didn’t go. Why would I? What would I do without other people to play off of? I only liked people watching me when I had control in a structured situation. Standing around by yourself is not a structured situation. I knew a lot of really good people in high school, and I understand very clearly now how terribly I treated the people who called themselves my friends. Before any knowledge of autism and Asperger’s in my life, I received no signals from my family, friends or teachers regarding my behavior. This is because there were not many to be seen. I was terrified of sticking out and not being who I thought I was in my head. I used people around me to accentuate and support this fantasy, and I used them without any regard for their own feelings. It was worse the more anxiety I felt in any given situation. If I was in a real panic, then I would do nearly anything to another person to save face. They could believe I really wanted to spend time with them at the party, but I just needed someone to arrive with and walk into the room with because I couldn’t go anywhere and walk into places where people were expecting me on my own. If I wanted to stay longer at a dance because I hoped to be noticed by some cute boy, I could pretend to be interested in my friend’s situation where her close family member had just died or she’d had a fight with a sister. I felt nothing in regard to their situations…I just needed to be in the room for about fifteen more minutes. Then maybe I could be noticed putting my arm around her and comforting her. Then he’d think I was not only attractive in my tight flare jeans and black top, but that I also cared for my friends. Bonus points. You may think I’m messing with you here, and I wish I could say I am. But I’m not. The social situation in high school was just as much a game and competition as my hours of dance classes and competitions. The goal was to coordinate with the others, but also to shine as the star player. I stayed in time and kept perfect spacing in the line with my team, but my kicks were higher because I had to be the best. None of this felt like a conscious undertaking. It would be one thing to decide in my head that I was going to do this thing and use someone for my own benefit, knowing it would hurt their feelings, and feel bad for that. But this wasn’t the case, either. I had absolutely no concept of whether what I was doing was hurtful or not. I either didn’t care or wasn’t aware. Naturally I hope that it mostly fell on the side of not being aware, but I can’t say that for sure. My emotions have always been an incredibly strong motivating force, and the strongest one of all is the fear and anxiety that comes along with failing socially. This game that I was playing was seamless. I felt like I was winning “points” socially if I made someone laugh or got a smile from a boy, just as if I was earning points for good turnout in ballet. I loved it when groups of friends were hating on each other for some silly reason because then there was some drama I could wedge myself into and this would bring attention to me. I’d had lots of practice navigating drama and being the neutral, caring friend. I loved this role because the closer I was to the center of the drama, the more I was looked at as the person who was in the know and able to update others on the situation. People I didn’t normally talk to or get attention from could come up to me and ask, “hey, do you know what’s going on with Amy?” And I could say something like, “Oh my gosh,” with the appropriate eye roll, maybe a brush of my hair straight back before letting it fall back into a messy, chic wave next to my face. Then I could launch into some details, maybe even convincing this older, popular girl that she was getting some juicy new details that I hadn’t yet told anyone else. Big points. Especially if she started to laugh and joke with me about it. An interaction like that could light up my whole day. Without thinking the specific words, the sensation was more or less that of, “I’m Heather today. I win.” The high school band room was my second home; that and the football field or the parking lot with chalk lines written on it for marching band practice during the summer. I made a friend outside of band, though—a best friend, I believed. We spent almost every day after school together in the fall my freshman year and she constantly called me to talk, asked to hang out, etc. My perception was that we were very close. Until Christmas break came. After Christmas break, though, she suddenly disappeared from my life…I had no idea what was happening. She hadn’t left to go to another school, and she hadn’t moved. She just did not try in any way to say hello or call or anything. Eventually we had a conversation that confused me even more when she said something that made me realize just how clueless I could be about associating with other people. She told me that she was “trying to fix me.” Those exact words. I never asked her what she meant by that, or what it was she thought needed “fixing.” But after that, I never spoke to her again. Not because I was mad or we had a fight afterwards. I don’t recall saying anything at all in response. We just completely disassociated. So now I wonder from time to time, am I saying something I shouldn’t right now? Am I making this person uncomfortable? The last thing in the world I want to do is make someone uncomfortable. But that’s not accurate…I’m way too self-centered for that. Actually, the last thing in the world I’d want to do is let myself be made a fool of. Or do something to inconvenience other people, making them feel obligated to do something for me. Stuff like that. I never wanted to be a high maintenance kind of person, because according to everything and everyone I saw in the movies or on TV or in magazines or on the radio or talking in the hallways, that’s the last kind of girl anyone wants to associate with. So I put a lot of effort into making sure that I never looked like something was bothering me, or like I was unhappy. This was kind of the beginning of the masking effect that I got to be so good at executing, until sometimes I don’t know what’s real. I found out over the course of winter break that year, as a freshman, that my persona was not nearly as clever as I’d thought, but I continued to get good grades, loved showing off in shows and competitions, had crushes on cute boys (though I couldn’t talk to them), and went to dances dressed up as cute as I could manage. Pretty typical and normal for a freshman girl from anyone’s perspective, I think. The lack of real social connection was hidden underneath all of these things, and I could feign concern with the best of them, watching movies and taking cues from the girls around me. I never got into “cat fights” and I never had a lot of boy drama going on. There was one boy in band who seemed to have a crush on me, but he was bigger and not as cute as the soccer player I was digging on, so I didn’t really pay any attention to him. I would hear rumors from the team and things like that, but he never came up to me and talked to me. He would tell me a few years later that when he would get on the bus to go home, he’d watch me walking around the building toward the middle school where I got a ride home from one of the teachers there who lived next door to me. He said he looked forward to watching me walk there every single day. It is a strange revelation when you hear about someone thinking about you and watching you without your knowledge. But at this time of faint rumors, he was not to my taste. After all, girls were supposed to be in to the cute sporty boys, and you definitely couldn’t have a crush on someone who was overweight. I never heard about the girls on my team or in choir or at dance classes liking someone who was “fat.” So why would I? That year flew by, and I was soon looking forward to my second summer with the marching band, having just finished my first year of high school with a solid A/B+ average. Our color guard team had gone through a couple of instructors and was struggling a little as we were losing some of our best team members as they graduated. Still, the band was even bigger that summer, which meant more people to show off for. I knew I was good at what I did, and I was determined to become captain—the youngest ever (I’m sure that isn’t true, but I believed it at the time). Our band instructor planned to challenge us with the most complicated show our school had ever done. It involved very fast and complex drill sets with the band jazz running all over the place forming rotating diamonds, weaving, etc. The music was also challenging and a little abstract. I wasn’t too thrilled about it at first. There weren’t a lot of pretty melodies or a soft, sweeping second movement like there had been the summer before. But the idea of doing something challenging and impressive was interesting. We worked extremely hard that summer and pulled off a pretty successful show. Though we didn’t execute it perfectly, we were appreciated for what we were trying to do, which was way above what other small bands were doing. We had placed first in the small band category at State Fair my first summer, and this year we placed second. Our color guard performance did not shine quite as brightly, but everyone was throwing around the buzz term “rebuilding year” and reassuring everyone that we would be back to where we were the year before in no time. I believed them, of course. I believed most anything people said to me back then. Between band competitions during July and August I would be traveling to fairs and dancing with my dance studio, performing our Irish dance routines. And again, the summer flew by. It certainly feels too dry to be revisiting these years in retrospect and realizing the lack of intimate human drama that is so characteristic to a lot of teenagers’ lives and memories. I was not forming close friendships, I was cultivating teamwork and etiquette in regard to rank and seniority. This is not to say, however, that I do not fondly think of the few people in my life who were absolutely loyal to me as friends throughout my time in high school, and to whom I feel I never gave a fraction of what I was given in terms of friendship. I was far too self-absorbed to see that my best friend, whom I’d met in band my very first summer, was always selfless in her willingness to listen and step in to solve problems between people. She never thought about herself, and she just appreciated hanging out with her friends in school and making casual conversation about the band. She was always concerned about her friends when we were upset about something. And because of her personality and caring nature, she was never at a loss for people who wanted, and needed, to talk to her about their problems, even though she admitted much later that it could be too much at times. “You can only give so much of yourself to other people before you start to notice yourself disappearing.” I had always taken her for granted. I knew she would come with me to dances if she could, even though she didn’t particularly enjoy them. I knew she would be around at lunch and I could get her to go eat with me where I wanted if I wanted to be seen by this or that boy, casually walking by and pretending not to notice him. I could also tell her things that I wanted to get around in the band room. I rarely told her things that I did not intend to get circulated around the band, usually trying to signal to some brass player or drummer that I thought he was cute, that sort of thing. By the time I was in my sophomore year of high school, I had become solidified in the belief system that valued physical beauty in girls above anything else. Most girls I knew seemed to obsess to some extent about their looks. I do believe that beginning in middle school, modeling the girls who got attention, I slowly started to realize I was bigger, and that it mattered. I was growing more and more sure that this was the way of the world and that being thin was all that mattered as a girl. I’d rejected the first boy to ask me out (through his friend, of course) my first summer in band because he was big and unattractive. I’d rejected Andy during my freshman year, the boy who watched me walk every single day from the school bus, because he was bigger, and therefore not particularly attractive. I watched girls on the cheerleading squad, which I slowly began to realize I would not have made because of my weight, and viewed them as “top tier” and untouchable. Their territory was that of all the teenage movie stars and they were who the best-looking guys went after, almost systematically. But it was more than just the fact that every girl wanted to be thin and pretty. Imagine if your life revolved around physical presentation and impressing judges. But that there wasn’t another side of life rooted in friendship, closeness, and connection to ground you. My life as a competitor was synonymous with my life as a high school student, as a daughter, sister, and friend. I collected points in high regard from friends the way I collected points in class for always being on time and ready with my shoes on at the beginning of classes. I presented good grades to my parents and was well behaved, very rarely disappointing them with my behavior. And if a boy looked my way while I walked down the hall or during band practice, those were massive points, to be sure. The problem, and irony, is that in the absence of emotional connection and any true sense of caring for my friends and the people I was surrounded by, I could easily go too far in the pursuit of climbing up the social ladder. I could use their emotions and their affection for me to my advantage without a second thought. Because that was the game. And I like to win games. For a while, the game remained relatively benign. I was not hurting people or betraying them or leaving them in the dust to do other things. My sophomore year closely resembled my freshman year, except that I was more determined to be better at everything and to lose weight and turn into Brittany Spears and all those things a teenage girl believes she can accomplish with a little good ol’ fashioned hard work. The worst part of sophomore year was the litany of guard instructors we had to go through to get to a really good one. Worst of all was a guy named John who was hired just in time to start our winter guard show. He was young, self-absorbed, and believed he could turn any team into a top-tier A class with his skills and show creativity. When he quickly found out he was wrong, he would blow up in front of us, throwing flags across the gym and cussing at us. Our captains immediately talked to the band director, who soon fired him. (The seniors that year wrote a lovely poem about him which I still have taped in my journal. I will not share here, for the sake of any sensitive ears.) After finding a replacement, it was time to prepare for the captain tryouts. I believe I was the only one interested in trying out for flag captain, and had no problem getting it. I led the group in basics drills and then taught a short piece that I had choreographed at home. I was very excited to have the title of captain, and I wore an additional patch on my team jacket. The victory was shadowed, however, by the fact that due to our John problem, we had an abysmally ill-prepared show to take to competition and consistently placed in the last or second-to-last positions. John’s replacement was also rather young and inexperienced and left after only a few months. Then, we finally managed to land a real guard instructor just in time to take us in to my third summer of marching band. The previous summer, I’d landed a small dance solo in the middle of the show, and this year I was given another dance solo during the second movement, which was a flowy, pretty melody that I enjoyed every time I heard it. I was also positioned right in the middle of the brass section, where Andy played trumpet. By this point I knew that he’d had a crush on me for a long time, and I remained unresponsive, though I relished the idea of being able to show off right in front of him in my pretty guard costume. This was sincerely exciting to me, without any regard for how it made him feel. It does seem monstrous to me as I reflect; how I managed to dance through high school using anyone and everyone for my own gain. The feelings of success in these endeavors worked as an emotional replacement for the intimacy I didn’t know I was missing. My lifestyle was cold and calculated, my goals lonely. I did not go in for hugs when I met up with friends at school or outside of school, as these didn’t happen that often. The social events I participated in were always structured around a clear purpose, even if that purpose was just to be seen looking my best. My relationship with my parents had always been similar. In place of intimacy there was a shared enthusiasm for competition and experiencing the material benefits of my parents’ hard work as entrepreneurs in their own fields. As a result, my brother got to go through boy scouts, and I was chauffeured all over the place for dance competitions and shows. There was always a dinner out afterwards, no matter the results, then a night at a hotel if we were out of state. I don’t ever remember feeling unsatisfied during this time. I had everything I wanted and needed to continue chasing after my dream, and the attention and praise I was getting from other disciplines was a special bonus. But where were the tear-filled, sleepless nights at a friend’s house when I needed support? Secret notes passed through class making plans and sharing secrets of our hearts over the phone? Invitations to small parties for just “best” friends, or to go to events that had to do with their own interests and passions as a trade-off for my own persistent ramblings? It never really occurred to me to have any interest at all in my friends’ dreams and passions. Anytime I met someone who seemed like a good dancer, I saw them as immediate competition instead of a potential friend. Loneliness would not take its place in my life until years later as I began to look deeper into myself. I Chapter 6: Hurtful Games f there is a point where I can say I definitely began to question myself in terms of being “like everyone else,” it has to be during my junior year of high school when Andy first began dating my friend Leah. Up to this point, he had pined for and pursued me to no avail. I liked the attention, stringing him along the whole way, showing off for him when I could. When he finally decided maybe he should give up on me, I found out by seeing them together one day in the lunchroom, Leah settling her head on his shoulder. I immediately felt a surge of jealousy. It felt like losing lots of points in the game of “high school crush,” and this wasn’t acceptable. My feelings for Andy began to change at this exact moment. The wheel began to turn as I pondered over the problem in my head…He was still a little overweight, but Leah was attracted to him, and she was pretty cute, so maybe I’m missing something? Perhaps I am missing out on something I don’t see yet? At some point during this year, I began talking to Andy and he would occasionally call, and we would talk on the phone as friends. As part of the deal of stringing along someone who likes you, it quickly becomes necessary to maintain some level of friendship. We didn’t talk to each other in person unless we were part of a group, and the only one-on-one contact we had was over the phone. One week, Leah had to go away for one week on some kind of retreat. Andy called me that first night she was gone, and we ended up talking for hours. I felt the wheels beginning to turn even faster now. I still have him, I thought. And now I’m entertaining the idea of what it would be like to be with him. The following night, he called again. And again, we talked for hours. He talked about his dreams and plans, I told him about mine. He hung on my every word like I was some kind of sage, and he appreciated everything I told him about my life. My feelings for him, however fictitiously evolved, grew as my ego was fed. How much more of this would I get if Leah were out of the picture? By the end of the week, he’d decided, and I’d hinted that maybe I’d be game to try. He would break up with Leah as soon as she got home, and we would begin dating. Victory! I won! That had to be at least 50 points… At this point, I was unaware that not everyone else may see things the way I did in this regard, and the following day during band, I received the first blatant hint from other people since the “fix me” fiasco. I walked into the gymnasium that morning with a bright smile on my face, and a few of the girls quickly approached me to ask what was going on. Why was I so happy today? So I told them, “Andy is going to break up with Leah for me!” I was completely taken aback by the reaction I saw from these girls. Instead of jumping up and down and congratulating me, I could tell that their thoughts had gone directly to Leah, and how sad she was going to feel when this happened. Leah was a saxophone player and a well-known member of the band, even to the color guard. She was a sweet, caring, selfless person. No one would want to see her get hurt. Not even if I was the one to “beat” her. I took the hint from their faces and immediately toned down my excitement. I let the moment pass and did not bring it up for the rest of class. I remained confused, but not overly concerned. I was sure of my win in this situation. Andy and I began seeing each other after school, and we continued to talk on the phone. But things quickly deteriorated as I started to get bored. He was pretty shy back then, perhaps a little self-conscious because of his weight. And I had never been in anything remotely resembling a romantic relationship with a boy. Both of us were clueless, and things moved very, very slowly. At some point, I’d exhausted the litany of brilliant insights I had at my disposal for Andy to fawn over and I found our conversations were beginning to feel repetitious and uninteresting. I continued to go to soccer games to catch a glimpse of the cute alto sax player who also played on the school’s soccer team. I had acquired a picture of him through a friend months earlier—Leah, as a matter fact, because she was also in the sax section—by having her go up to him and ask for his picture so that I could show Santa what I wanted for Christmas. A few days later in a class we shared, he turned around and handed me a picture. I accepted with a big grin on my face, oblivious to the looks from the people around me. I cringe to remember how natural I thought I was being, and how obviously childish and naïve I really was. When Andy found out about the picture after we started “dating,” he asked if he could see it, and I decided to give it to him. He promptly put the picture between the slices of bologna and cheese in his sandwich and took a big bite. I do not remember how long this informal relationship lasted, but it did fade without us having engaged in much resembling physical affection. But things with Leah had already been destroyed, and there was no attempt to rekindle the relationship by either party. I must have not just been bored, but also a little frightened. I had, after all, treaded into completely new territory without a clue as to how things were supposed to go. Or rather, without a clue as to how they were supposed to go in real life as opposed to the movies. What else was there in a relationship if he wasn’t telling me how amazing and beautiful I was? But you know what? This concern only lasted a month or so, and it didn’t matter at all after that point as something very big occurred in the fall of my junior year. I’d found an Irish dance studio that competed in traditional Irish dance! The catch was that the studio was in a city a full hour away from my hometown. I told my mom about the studio and showed her the website. I’d done some research and found out that the dancers in shows like Lord of the Dance and Riverdance had all trained and competed with these “traditional” schools which specialized only in Irish dance. There was this whole world of traditional Irish dance competitions called “feiseanna” where girls competed in their age groups to climb the ranks until they reached the highest tier of “open championship.” My mother agreed to drive me the hour once a week to begin attending these classes, and I was absolutely ecstatic. Everything else in my life was totally eclipsed by this new giant step towards my ultimate dream, and I was determined to be the best dancer at the school. The Dance Celtic Academy of Irish Dance was a fair-sized school with lots of dancers from beginner to open championship. I would be joining a class of novice/prizewinner dancers who were a little younger than I was. It was pretty unusual for someone to begin Irish dancing at my age (I was 15 or 16), and I knew that I would probably have to start my dancing here with younger dancers. It wasn’t as though I was a complete beginner, though, as I’d been dancing with Cindy’s studio for some time in a wide range of disciplines. Cindy had coined the phrase “show Irish” to describe the type of Irish dancing she taught as part of our competitive pieces and for the recitals. I learned the basics of Irish dancing hard shoe and soft shoe, “hop-back-2-3”s, “skip-2-3”s, trebles, etc. Her choreography was always to a steady 4/4 rhythm and accentuated dancing in unison, often in long lines just like the dancers in Riverdance and Lord of the Dance. At Celtic Academy, it would be all about dancing as a solo competitor, at least for me (I was never involved with Ceili and group dances). I instantly fell in love with the academy. As I walked in, I was assaulted by the sounds of shoes dancing across the plywood flooring in the studio next to the front door. There were four big class studios and a few smaller rooms for solo instruction. I was introduced to the teachers and owners of the academy and welcomed into class. At the beginning of each class, novice and prizewinner dancers from several age groups would be together in the same room for drills and ab exercises. We would do across-the-floors two or three at a time and do skip-2-3’s in a circle for a few minutes nonstop. After drills, the groups would separate into their separate age groups/skill levels. The first thing I learned from research and my teachers was the structure of moving up in the world of traditional Irish dance. I would be competing in feis competitions with my age group and skill level, starting as a novice. I would perform two steps, right and left, to a specified rhythm in both hard shoe and soft shoe. The dancers line up in one long line and “pick up” after a set number of bars with no break in the music. Dancers dance two at a time, which I remember feeling nervous about…how do they manage to not run into each other? (Well, it happens, and it sucks, though I don’t believe it ever happened to me.) The first set of steps I learned was called a “reel,” which is a soft shoe dance performed to music at a 2/2 or 4/4 time signature. I was familiar with Irish music and the instruments used, though I was not prepared for the beautiful intricacy of the traditional tunes. This appreciation added greatly to my experience, and I was hopelessly addicted to the dance. I picked up steps quickly, and my teachers were impressed. I’d quickly shown a talent that surpassed other dancers in my class, who had been dancing since they were very little. I was both prideful about this and cautious, as I did not want to stir up negative feelings with my classmates. I knew this was more likely because I was not inclined to “chit chat” with the girls during breaks or before and after class. I don’t believe I ever had a single conversation with anyone outside of a few words of instruction or advice. I knew where 100% of my focus should be. The second set of soft shoe steps I learned were to a rhythm called a “slip jig,” which is music to a 9/8 time signature, and which quickly became my favorite. It felt more lovely, airy, and flowing than the reel and put a lot of emphasis on graceful movements and height of jumps called “glides,” which do feel as though you are suspended in the air for a moment before descending (if done properly). I would eventually consider myself a “specialist” in the slip jig, as I preferred it to the reel and would compete in this rhythm rather than the reel after placing out of novice and prizewinner level. Then there were the hard shoe rhythms. My mom had purchased my Rutherford shoes soon after joining Cindy’s studio, and they were among my most prized possessions. These shoes are not cheap, as any Irish dance mom will tell you, and they are serious when it comes to making noise. The toe and heel are made of a fiberglass mixture that makes for a very loud sound. I remember first wearing them and comparing them to the taps on my old tap shoes, which sound very lame in comparison! The first traditional set of steps in hard shoe I learned was to a “hornpipe,” which is in 4/4 time, and which I found very exhausting. I was used to dancing in 4/4, but this was a whole different level of discipline and emphasis on technique. As with the soft shoe dances, I was learning two steps, each step performed once on the right foot and once on the left foot. Instead of the heavy 4/4 “show” Irish I had been performing, which placed emphasis on very clear beats 1-2-3-4, the hornpipe steps I was now learning consisted of very intricate, complex rhythms that seemed to be “stuffed” in between beats; syncopated rhythms, downbeats, fast eighth note clicks, traveling heel clicks. It was fascinating, and because I had listened to Irish dance far longer than I’d been dancing it, the rhythms felt natural to me. And within no time, I was picking up the traditional Irish dance steps. Finally, the treble jig, which is a hard shoe rhythm performed in 6/8, would become my absolute favorite and my competition of choice throughout my time dancing with Celtic Academy. The slower feel of the treble jig allowed for an even more impressive complexity of rhythm in the clicks to my ear. I’d also recognized the rhythm from the act in Lord of the Dance called “Breakout.” Within a few months, I went to my first feis with a rented uniform that represented my school. I remember first trying on the dress and being astounded at how simultaneously heavy and comfortable it was. The skirt itself felt like it weighed 20 pounds, and the sleeves were made of a generous amount of fabric that came down over my wrists. It was certainly beautiful, and the final touch would be the enormous curly wig which is standard across most of the dancers’ costumes in the world of traditional Irish dance competition. My mother and I did not find this out, however, until the day of my very first competition. My mother had arduously curled my hair in an effort to get it to look the way she’d seen others’ hair online and in pictures, but we quickly realized that everyone was in fact wearing wigs (that are not cheap, I would add), to achieve that perfect full, bouncy head of curls. My mother generously coughed up the $60 or $70 dollars to purchase a wig and, with the help of one of the vendors, fitted me with a hair net and pins, as well as a tiara to finish off the look. It was so beautiful! I loved how the wig looked, and I soon fit in nicely with all of my fellow competitors. As a reward for my hard work and dedication to becoming the best, I placed in all of my dances at my very first competition, placing first, second or third in reel, slip jig, hornpipe, and treble jig. Each dancer is given a number at the beginning of competition, which we place in a plastic holder and pin to the front of our dresses. After each competition finishes, dancers have to wait an uncertain amount of time before the results are “announced” or numbers are written on a giant whiteboard corresponding to the competition and boxes labeled First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth. Those who place in First, Second, or Third are awarded medals or small trophies. I still remember my first picture taken at that feis with me holding my first trophies wearing my favorite red Lord of the Dance t-shirt. After that, everything else in life was secondary, including any romantic feelings or friendships I may have cultivated as a neurotypical high school girl. There were feisseanna in and around Ohio and Indiana throughout the year, and my parents were willing to drive me to competitions as far away as Missouri, Minnesota, and West Virginia. After finishing one competition, I would immediately start thinking about the next and perfecting my steps even more. I was competing at least once almost every month of the year, and sometimes I would have to choose between an Irish dance competition or another dance or guard competition. It made sense, of course, to prioritize the color guard competitions because I was part of a team that counted on me, though I very often during the winter would have much preferred to go to the Irish dance competitions. I was always focusing and getting better and “placing out” in order to climb to the next tier of competition. I began in novice, but I did not stay there long. There was a policy at Celtic Academy for moving on to the next tier. I had to place first three times in each dance to move into the next tier, which was called “prizewinner.” I don’t remember how many competitions it took to move up to prizewinner, but it was not very many, as I was placing in nearly every competition I went to. The competition in prizewinner was certainly tougher, but I was doing well from the start in this tier as well. Overall, I don’t think I ever left a feis without having placed in at least one dance. As mentioned before, the brief romantic experimentation between Andy and myself fizzled out by the middle of my junior year, and Andy had finally had enough. He began dating another girl on the color guard team, who was one year my senior. Her name was Melody. She was a bubbly and adorable red-head who was maybe 5’1”, with some generosity. She had always been there throughout my time with the color guard, and I did respect her as part of the team, though I think it would be too much to call us friends. I did realize at times, though, that this was not how the other girls thought. Some of them indeed called me their friend, and I was very thankful for it. In my mind, though, there was very little association going on outside of the convenience and obligatory work together as part of a team. I did not go out with them and hang out outside of a few sleepovers to prepare for a color guard event and paint t-shirts or something. Any intimate details were released as part of a group setting and never one-on-one between me and another girl on the team. The few people in high school who did seem to qualify as friends would invite me to hang out occasionally outside of school. Throughout the waltz of romance between myself and Andy, my best friend Joy was always there to kind of act as an intermediary and to make things less awkward. There was another girl in my class, Jenna, who seemed to gravitate toward me and eventually started asking me over to her house regularly. I found her to be quite clingy and emotional, constantly pestering me for not wanting to hang out with her as much or as fervently as she wanted to hang out with me. It was a constant battle that I did not know how to navigate gracefully. As a result, I often dealt with complaints by ignoring them or redirecting until attention could be placed somewhere else. I could not very well say that I didn’t like hanging out with her so much, as I knew that was rude. But it was nevertheless true. Luckily, I was busy enough with all the extracurricular things in my life that I very often had lots of excuses if I did not feel like doing things with her. After all, in my mind I was pretty much seeing these friends every single day in school, why was it necessary to hang out on the weekends when I was trying to relax or watch my shows? This only changed when the boy dynamic was in flux. If there was a rumor that a boy liked me, I would usually find out from Joy and then there may be a meetup planned at the bowling alley or the movie theater with him so it would work out to be something like an informal date. I liked the attention way more than any of the boys…that is, until I saw Andy with Melody over the course of my junior year. Back to Andy Andy had lost a lot of weight and had seemed to mature by the time he was a sophomore and I was a junior. When he started openly dating Melody, he would come up to the color guard girls in band class before the bell and wrap his arms around her waist, just under her boobs, and put his chin on her shoulder. She would laugh and giggle sweetly, and my core temperature would rise a few degrees. Was I angry? Jealous? Sad? Perhaps all of these things. I didn’t understand them at first, but I quickly realized that it was nearly intolerable to see Andy and Melody happy together. I felt discarded, and the jealousy soon won out as the dominant emotion. I could have been content that Andy had found someone who made him happy and that I didn’t have to revisit the awkward romance that had clearly gone nowhere—but I wasn’t. I had to do something about this to win back my points. I had to be more desirable than Melody, and I convinced myself that my feelings for Andy could be very different because of the differences I’d seen in him. (I was unwilling to admit that a large part of this was simply the fact that he’d lost weight; I told myself that he’d obviously matured and could actually handle a “grown up” type of relationship.) The real sting came when I learned that they had started sleeping together. Melody would come in all bright-eyed like she had something to say and all of us would gather around her as high school girls do when they sense some juicy details about to be spilled. She never went into great detail, or perhaps I blocked out the information, but it only worked to fuel the jealousy inside me. The summer after my junior year would be a big one, as we were getting ready to lose a lot of really good girls from the team as they graduated. Melody was one of them. This was her final summer. I had to stomach their relationship without saying anything, feigning support and happiness for her. During the school year I had hung out with Joy, Andy and a few others outside of school on occasion, but I was no longer invited to hang out with Andy. I don’t know how much Andy told Melody about our history, but if she had any negative feelings, they were completely hidden. She continued to laugh and joke and have fun with all of us on the team and there seemed to be absolutely no bad blood between us. She was a great person who considered herself my friend. But “real” and “intimate” friendship was something I was only familiar with from watching movies. I did not value my social relationships during this time, and I would regret this later in life. Joy was the closest friend I had, but we only maintained a friendship as long as we were both involved in activities, like band, or both planning on attending an event, like a dance. We talked in school about the drama going on around us or gossiped about guys in band getting in trouble, but the most intimate conversations revolved around me and Andy. I could milk her for details. but I could also let on that I may just still have feelings for Andy… knowing full well it would get around to him. And, of course, it did, but not until the beginning of my senior year, with Melody gone and off to college. Now was my chance to make some moves. I’d revealed to Joy that I may still have feelings for Andy again, knowing very well that she would eventually have to tell him. She talked to everyone, listened to everyone, and very often shared details, not out of any intent to harm or spread rumors, but just because she talked with everyone and wanted to discuss details. Joy admitted that she may have let this information pass on to Andy, and I soon began to get a response. We began talking again, just the two of us. He started to call me again, and sometimes he would catch me in the hall or after band practice. It all led to one fateful night that fall when Andy and I decided to hang out for a while to talk before he was due to perform at a concert with the jazz band. We met up at the mall. I parked next to his car and got out. I got into his car, and we began a very slow, awkward conversation about my having feelings for him, and lo and behold, he still had feelings for me, too. We sat in the car and never actually got out to walk around the mall. We must have been there for a couple of hours. One interesting detail I remember is that there was one point where he noticed I would not make eye contact with him. He indicated that he attributed this to my being shy, and he didn’t like that I wouldn’t look him in the eyes. He challenged me then and there to look up and look him in the eyes for a full minute. I laughed nervously and said I would try. Of course, it was very uncomfortable, and I could not last for more than a few seconds. I’d always thought the same thing as far as just being shy and feeling awkward about looking people in the eyes. But there was something almost painful about looking at him like that. I usually describe the feeling when people ask me about eye contact by comparing it to that machine at the eye doctor where they blow a puff of air into your eye and you’re expected to hold your eyes open, waiting and expecting that uncomfortable puff of air. It feels like that, and it is unbearable after a few seconds of steady eye contact. There are emotions that come into play as well. Not just awkwardness and shyness, but a real fear and feeling like I’m invading someone else’s space, a part of them that I don’t want to glimpse but am being forced to through eye contact. After failing a couple of times at this and giggling it off, he then said that he wanted to kiss me. I kept saying I couldn’t do that because he was with Melody—more because I knew it would be wrong in everyone’s eyes for me to be willing to make out with my friend’s boyfriend than any real moral convictions of my own. I knew even as I was insisting on saying no that things would end with a kiss. He dejectedly drove back to where my car was parked as he needed to head to the school to get ready for the concert. As he got close, I told him to park. He did, and then I said, “kiss me.” He immediately turned and cupped my face in his palm and kissed me. It was our first kiss. My head floated away, and he touched my chin with his finger once again and led my lips back to his for another. It had to have been very romantic at the time because I have an entry in my journal gushing about how perfect it was. It was just like the movies! It was big, big points! It felt a lot like the time I’d broken him off from Leah, only this was a much bigger deal. Melody was a hotshot college freshman, after all, and I’d just stolen her boyfriend. Now I just had to wait for him to deal with breaking things off with her and my first real relationship would begin. He drove off after letting me out near my car, and I just sat in the driver’s seat of my green Dodge Intrepid. I sat there forever, it seemed, thinking about what I’d just done. No remote feelings of guilt, mind you, just sweet, sweet victory. Eventually I turned the car on and headed for the school where I would be watching the concert with Joy and a few others from band. I pulled in and walked in through the band room, and then I saw a surprise guest in the wings near the auditorium. It was Melody. She’d come into town to surprise Andy…and she’d succeeded. I didn’t get to see the initial reaction as I’d arrived after the band had started to arrange themselves on stage, but I could imagine it was not a great experience for him. I entered the auditorium and sat in the front row…right next to Melody…for the entire hour. I was not around when Andy broke things off with Melody, nor do I remember hearing him say much about the breakup and how Melody reacted, but I do know she was hurt, and she was also aware of how I’d treated him the last time I broke him off from his girlfriend for a chance to be with me. He said that her comment was something to the effect that he should be careful because I was, “just not very nice when it comes to boys.” Not inaccurate. But I was convinced that what I’d seen between Melody and Andy was what I wanted, and now that he was actually kinda cute, I felt it was my time to claim him. During my senior year, if people thought poorly of me and the way I treated my friends, I didn’t hear about it. Which isn’t too surprising, because I may have easily been so focused on competition and exploring the benefits of my new boyfriend to notice or care. I still considered Joy my closest friend, though she often talked about the distress of trying to be friends with both me and Melody, whom she also cared a lot about. But it was a lot easier with Melody gone to college. Soon, Andy and I were experimenting sexually, and soon sex became number one on the agenda each time we met up on the weekends. Our most frequented “spot” was in the parking lot of an environmental center not too far from the high school. I’ve honestly never seen this place in the daylight. It was our go-to meetup spot for nearly every nighttime encounter we planned. He lavished me with adoration, just like he’d done when we first began talking on the phone. I would share intimate details about my thoughts and my life, and he would listen intently and then tell me he thought I was amazing and beautiful and all that stuff. We moved smoothly into the realm of sex, but each encounter was very, very quick and very one-sided. I had no idea what an orgasm felt like, but I knew from watching movies that I was supposed to moan and pretend like I was having a good time so that it would turn him on, so I did my best. I never thought this was odd in any way, I just assumed this was what was expected. If I wasn’t actually feeling much pleasure, I was still obligated to act like it, or else he would lose interest in me. This would result in my losing those hard-earned points, so moan I did…and I was quite loud. Eventually he began giving me directions, asking me to scream for him. I did, and it was completely unnatural and awkward, but it seemed to give him a lot of pleasure, and that’s all that mattered. I remember going down on him and viewing this act as absolutely required if I was going to consider myself an attractive female. If I didn’t do it for him, he would just find someone else who would, maybe lose interest in me altogether. He gave me loose direction, but I ended up asking some advice from a couple girls on the color guard team, who gave me some pointers regarding proper technique. Despite all the effort, and the praise I received for that effort, I was still chronically self-conscious and insecure, something I’d not fully realized until I had someone in my possession to whom I’d become fully addicted. The aura of his idolization of me soon faded, and real life settled in. The reality of what a real relationship was like slapped me in the face as completely new territory. The movies never really went beyond the perfect honeymoon stage; they usually ended there. At least, the ones I had seen. So I was completely unprepared to see him as something other than my personal ego-stroker. He would sometimes make casual comments here and there about some new freshman he considered really hot, and my heart would break in two. He wasn’t supposed to say things like that. I’m supposed to be the only one ever on his mind! (A glimpse here of the level of naivete I still demonstrated.) The worst, though, was when he would occasionally talk about Melody, just to get some feelings or thoughts off his chest, I suppose. I begrudgingly listened, not really caring about his struggle with these memories and conflicts but wanting to be the model girlfriend. At some point, he admitted to being sexually involved with her, which I’d already known but which struck me differently coming out of his mouth. I asked him how many times and he scoffed—as if he was keeping count. In my horror, I asked, “what do you mean? Did you do it multiple times? Ten? Fifteen?” He rolled his eyes again and said, “I dunno, maybe a hundred?” Again, I felt a punch in the stomach and my heart felt heavy. He was my first, but he’d already been with Melody, lots and lots of times. Then I had to know details. Like, you know, was she better than me? Did he like her breasts better because they were a lot bigger than mine? I was very anxious about this. What if he said yes? How was I supposed to fix that? To my instant relief, he said that it was actually kind of annoying, having really big boobs in his face while she was on top. I sighed inside, the anxiety dissipating almost instantly. At least there’s that. It then became a priority for me to make sure I was going down on him every single time we got together. I had to make sure I was giving him everything he wanted, because if I did that, it meant that I was a sexy girlfriend. And that’s really all that mattered as a girl in high school, right? That and beating people at the dance competitions every chance I got. This idea of attractiveness as the only relevant value a girl has was deeply embedded from a young age and continued to be reinforced throughout my increased awareness of how I was both talented and big. The latter seemed to be more important than the former, and in fact, destroyed a lot of the potential being talented offered in my life altogether. But there is one more thing of which I am absolutely sure, and that is that as my relationship grew with Andy, through the bouts of self-consciousness and insecurity and painful jealousy and self-doubt, I became very much in love with Andy. This has been confirmed not just from my intermittent memories from the time but also through the cringeworthy reading of my journal entries from my senior year and into my first year of college. My writing is exactly how you would imagine a young, naïve, inexperienced girl might write about her “first love.” Everything I did, I did for “our future life together” and for his “happiness.” I worked out, and it was only for him. I took cues from the girls I knew were popular and pretty and tried to emulate them as best I could. If I had not done this, there would have been quite a void where the identity as a young girl in love would be. The only “real” identity I had was as a competitor; my only true identity. Everything else was forged from the emulation of models. I was not quirky, with a tendency to stand a certain way while talking with my hair pulled back behind my ears, because that’s who I was. This was who I believed I should be, a lot of it going back to the pretty popular girl in middle school, Heather. Now, this would change around depending on my mood and the persona I wanted to convey. I wasn’t always wanting to be a “vixen.” Sometimes I wanted to be the tomboy because I’d picked up that this was pretty cool and could be attractive to guys. A lot of the time I just held the image of girls like Brittany Spears in my mind (probably my number one model as a girl). She was perfect in every way to me. I was convinced that I could resemble her, if only I could lose a few pounds. I had honestly convinced myself that my body shape matched hers, and that I just needed to exercise some more and get smaller and then I would look like her. My default mode was a mixture of pretty and cute. This meshed well with my natural introverted nature and shyness, which tended to give off an endearing, mysterious, beautiful vibe (or so I was convinced, as the girls in movies seemed to be this way). I also wanted to keep up my pensiveness, especially around Andy, as he seemed to appreciate this about me and constantly told me I was smart and “deeper” than other girls. Looking Ahead As the months passed from fall into winter, I had to start getting applications into colleges. The only thing I’d ever thought about doing with my life was dancing, so I naturally chose a few schools with reputable dance departments. One of them was a University in Dayton, Ohio, precisely one hour away. In order to get into the dance program, I had to audition. The audition was primarily focused on ballet technique and involved learning a few short sequences to then perform in front of the teachers. We had to wear a black leotard and pink tights with our hair pulled up in a bun. I remember feeling a little uncomfortable at the idea of doing this, and I had never had super formal ballet training. Despite this, I thought I would be able to get in, I sincerely did. That vision of dancing with Lord of the Dance was still a fire burning in the back of my mind at all times, and I would accomplish anything I had to in order to get there. It didn’t occur to me until later, after I’d miserably failed at the audition, that it really didn’t make a lot of sense for me to be a dance major studying dance in all forms except for the one I actually wanted to be good at. The dots in my mind simply connected linearly—I had to go to college, I wanted to dance as a career, therefore, I would study dance in college. It boggles my mind every time I think about how naïve I was, but there was a logic in mind that coincided with all of the praise I’d gotten since first beginning dance classes at that first tap class. I’d always picked up things quickly, out-danced a lot of the other dancers in my class, and won dance solos in performances and in color guard. Therefore, it didn’t matter that I was bigger than any professional dancer I’d ever seen. I convinced myself that when the time came, I would be able to lose weight, and easily. I had just been too busy lately… At the dance audition, I stood in a line with all of these other dancers— thin dancers—waiting for their chance to audition. We all lined up at the barre and went through some straightforward exercises. Very basic in nature, but I struggled through them. I wasn’t a ballet dancer and continued to consider this as simply the route through which I had to pass to get to that professional Irish dance career. After barre exercises, we grouped in the middle and learned some short routines, then performed them in groups. I did not catch on to these at all, and this may have been the first time in a dance setting where I was not way ahead in both ability and memorization. I stumbled through and faked as well as I could. But at the end of the audition, I was fairly certain they were not going to let me into the dance program. This was very scary. And a while later when I received the rejection letter, I thought, what the hell do I do now? I literally had zero interests outside of dancing professionally. The thought of working in an office or doing something academic with my life was disgusting and nauseating. When I went in to finalize my admission to college, my counselor assured me that I didn’t have to declare a major yet and that I should use my elective courses to explore some different possibilities before choosing something I liked. I think it was at this point that I started to wonder why college had always been a given in the first place. College was a natural progression after high school, and I believed that not going through this natural course meant that I was dumb or lazy or a failure. I would end up working somewhere like (gasp) a “skilled job” like at a factory or as a mechanic or carpenter or something like that. These were not even girl jobs and had never been an option in my mind. Those classes in high school were for the dumb kids, and I had done very well in school. I was even admitted to the “honors” program at college, where I would be taking additional seminars and staying in the nice honors dorms. I was later very grateful for the freedom of beginning college as part of the “liberal arts” program. I chose several classes that sounded interesting, including classes on existentialism and Buddhism, and discovered many things that have remained a central part of my life to this day. I became interested in philosophy and Japan and eventually started thinking about English as a possible major, though I still had no thoughts on a career path. College was right down the street from Celtic Academy, and by the time I’d entered college, I had made it to the preliminary championship level at competition. This level is right below the highest level of competition, which is open championship. The snag was that I had just entered college, and there was a lot to be discovered and pulled into beyond new classes. That fall, Andy was elected homecoming king, and I was ecstatic to get to come home as a big bad college girl to escort him onto the dance floor as part of the parade. I dressed in a particularly low-cut blouse, which I covered until after leaving my parents’ house. For some reason, Andy was not super happy. He had missed me a lot once I’d left, though he was making the trip to see me on the weekends when I didn’t come home. We talked on the phone a lot, but it wasn’t enough. And though I also missed him, he had a much rougher time of it because he was so anxious to get the hell out of high school and join me at college. He had become just as “in love” as I had been before leaving for college, but as soon as I arrived and started meeting people there, it became easy to get hopelessly distracted while getting excited about new things. I think he saw this almost immediately, and perhaps he sensed that I was slipping away. I met my first college friends at orientation, most of them fellow honors program students. A few of them were in the dorm near my floor. I remember putting a lot of effort into introducing myself to people I passed on the way to campus in an effort to find a group of friends to belong to. I was high and driven by the feeling of being on my own and in the middle of so much going on, so much being pitched as my future and making it whatever I wanted it to be. It’s amazing how light I felt with all of this potential sitting in front of me. I truly felt like I could do anything I wanted. I had been told how amazing and smart and talented I was my entire life, and so I could not foresee any kind of disappointment on the horizon. I’d quickly written off the failed dance audition as not being the right path for me in the first place. I didn’t need or want ballet training to be an Irish dancer. I could pursue that on my own. The question of why I was at college, then, never crossed my mind, but it did feel like a kind of playground for my mind to explore whatever I wanted. Though I was soon to discover some distractions that would loom large in my life for the next year and a half. At some point in the first month or two of college, I met a party girl named Christine. For some reason she latched on to me as a potential drinking/party buddy, and she seemed just like the popular, attractive girl I’d always played sidekick to before, so it was a comfortable pairing. I looked at her as someone who could elevate my standing in the game, and I was glad to accept an invitation to come over to her room and open up a giant bottle of something called “Everclear.” Christine got out the bottle along with a jug of orange juice and, before too long, I was completely tanked. I do not remember anything that happened for the rest of that evening, but it did mark the starting point of a lengthy partnership in the college party scene. We were soon meeting more freshmen and going to parties around campus, as well as a few off campus. It was a very exciting time, but I was never comfortable going anywhere without Christine. I was familiar with the sidekick role and would have been quite clueless if put in a position where I had to be someone else. And there was something else happening, too. One night back at home, I was sitting with Andy in his car getting ready to admit that I’d gotten drunk the weekend before at a party and kissed some random guy I didn’t know. I remember the party fondly and had had a lot of fun, but I was also feeling genuine remorse for how much Andy was suffering, knowing I was off at college experimenting while he was stuck in his last year of high school. After I told him, a look of utter defeat came over his face. I told him it meant nothing, and that I was just being stupid and drunk. He believed me, but he just felt like he was not as much a part of my life anymore, and he was afraid I would lose interest in him. That night in the car, I told him that would never happen, even as I probably knew otherwise. I just wasn’t ready to hurt him like that. Or perhaps…I was just too scared to say it to his face. A few weeks later, I broke up with him over the phone. I remember feeling nothing. It was a chore I had to check off my to-do list, and the overwhelming love I’d felt in the months before leaving for college had seemed to completely dissipate. I listened to him cry and plead over the phone, feeling annoyed and just wanting to hang up and go to bed. My delivery was callous, and pretty much void of feeling, which I’m sure only added to his devastation. He had given me a promise ring in the final weeks of my senior year of high school. He considered it a sort of early engagement ring, and his words alluded to his desire to be with me for the rest of his life. I remember being taken aback by this sentiment, but I played it off as smoothly as possible. I hadn’t thought about us in those terms, but I was endlessly flattered by how he felt about me, and this overshadowed any kind of responsibility I should have felt to be honest and forthcoming about my feelings as they started to fade. Then it was too late. It was a horrible thing to do, to break up like that, knowing, at least to the extent that I could understand, that he truly loved the crap out of me and wanted to be with me forever. But I quickly turned my attention to all the new boys on the market in front of me, strategizing for how to play the field and change tactics and identities to match the type of boy I was around. This stage began a true realization of the chameleon nature inside of me that being in a space with lots of different people demands when I did not have a solid sense of identity to start with. I was always someone else, mostly Heather or Brittany Spears or Erin the Goddess or Saoirse, maybe a tomboy version when I was around the skater boys. The intricacy of the web of personalities I maintained became something of a point of pride to me; it was truly a skill that I had mastered, and it almost felt like I was fooling all of these people into thinking I was someone I wasn’t. The problem was, I had no handle on who I really was, or what that actually meant. F Chapter 7: Chameleon riendship and connection have always been quite ethereal concepts for me. I’ve always felt conflicted in terms of whether I should attribute this lack of caring and empathy for others solely to Asperger’s syndrome, or simply to a deeply ingrained fear that is simply exacerbated by autism. The transition to college was simple for me when it came to leaving things behind. I did not have a period of homesickness, aside from being with Andy, which lasted for only a month or two. I don’t believe connection with other human beings is impossible for me, but it has always been difficult to explain in words during conversation without coming off very differently from what I intend. Therefore, I believe, through writing slowly here, I can come closer to explaining this very strange and oftentimes painful experience of human relationships. My understanding of friendship from what I’ve observed in most people around me is that once a friendship is formed, there is this very strong bond that develops over time, like an invisible tether that allows one to feel the other at all times, even if there is a period where the two are apart. Naturally this bond becomes stronger or weaker based on many factors. If someone is betrayed horribly by a friend, that bond does not just disappear but also sears and leaves a scar, depending on how much that person meant to the other. Likewise, bonds are strengthened through time spent and moments shared, and struggles gone through together. This allows for strength and connection during the time when the two very close friends are apart. And when there is reunion—it is a wonderful occasion. This is not my experience, and it has never been my experience, though my personal experience of connection has its own set of merits. Close friendships for me ended very early on in my childhood when I was not yet aware of what close friendship meant. As a child, it was much more feasible to bypass the uncomfortable social rules and etiquette—greetings and departures, small talk, chit chat, etc. When Amber came over to my house or vice versa, as children, we would immediately dive into whatever was in our minds at the time. No filters, no “catching up” on our lives since our last meeting. Life was not a continuum like it is in adulthood. There was only the moment and our impulses and the strange and wonderful coordination of those impulses that would make for an incredible afternoon or evening filled with absolutely uninhibited childishness. I remember dancing and roaming and inventing and pretending. Nothing else. Those times are precious still, even as my specific memories have faded significantly. And as much as I’ve managed to hold on to from my childhood promise, it is now impossible to embody that child’s mindset completely. Though it is still there, it is mired in politics, social anxieties, etiquette, expectations, self-consciousness, and boredom. Now, even if I were to meet someone with whom I could instantly disappear into that realm without introduction, I would be too embarrassed and self-conscious to go there, at least without significant mental effort to bypass all of those inhibitions. Because of this, once I became aware of myself, perhaps around third grade, this experience with others became impossible, and the friendships over the years since have been largely of convenience or association. I could still spend time in pretend worlds and enjoy the time I had with groups of girls at sleepovers and things, but there is a level of intimacy that was permanently absent. The closest I ever achieved were those experiences with boys, beginning with Andy, who would listen and find the things I rambled about interesting, even intelligent. I easily mistook the feeling of pride and having my ego stroked for intimacy and closeness. And, of course, I was addicted to this in each instance, milking it for all it was worth when I could. This continued in college, though I had to become a little more strategic among a much larger pool of competition. At this point, I had fully realized both the scope and limits of my physical attractiveness. I realized early on, with my introduction to Christine, that I could not compete physically. Therefore, I had to go for another angle, and I put a great deal of effort into this persona once I’d fully formed it in my head. This persona was designed based on the group of people I was beginning to party with regularly, after being introduced to them by Christine. I decided I was mysterious and enigmatic, with lots of introspective things to say to you if you approached me drunk at a party. I was moderately successful with this, and so I continued. I considered myself much more thoughtful and interesting than Christine but was continually frustrated at how much more value her currency of physical attractiveness held over my introverted charm. I considered it a success to be able to steal attention away from her with a conversation, usually in a corner or outside on the lawn, looking up at the night sky. Bonus points if they were to start the night with Christine and end up talking to me. This made me feel very good when it happened. Eventually our group solidified into a fairly consistent set of people who would coordinate where and when parties and meetups were happening. This group included a very strange and puzzling human being named Derek and a very tall, handsome, and socially brilliant guy named Joe, both in the film program, who would be seen together as consistently as Christine and me. Orbiting around Joe were many people from the film program and friends of friends of friends. To make my mark and to stand out, I would often wear something “different,” like a suit jacket over a t-shirt or other layers in an attempt to look cool and like I had my own style. This was necessary to make up for the fact that I was not going up to people like Christine all the time or participating loudly in social conversations. I had to set out bait to hook someone who would be intrigued and come over to have a conversation with me. Of course, this was made easier by getting completely shit-faced, as this always gave me a precarious boost in self-confidence. This was one version of myself, the first and most well-formed iteration of my college career. It persisted for a good two years or so before fading out as that group fell apart and everyone went their separate ways. The second persona formed when I met another freshman who also played around on the piano and wrote her own songs. I met Kate in the piano lounge, one of my favorite spots on the entire campus, and we hit it off right away. We hit it off because she fit into a mold that I already had practice with. She was quirky, naïve, religious, and rather innocent. She liked to pretend to fall or trip all the time because it made people laugh. People did, because we wouldn’t have wanted to embarrass her by calling her out on it. She played the theme from Amélie on the piano, and I thought it was beautiful. She taught me a little bit of it. Then I would play the stuff I had written, and I was able to go to this lounge and practice a lot to keep them in my memory. She thought my stuff was gorgeous as well, and eventually we started hanging out outside of the piano lounge and going outside on the quad with my guitar. I’d recently started playing guitar after discovering my mother had a beautiful Alvarez she never played. I was starting to get into folk music and finger style around this time. I would play out in the grass and sometimes we’d sing songs together. I knew well how to play the innocent, youth group-type, though I’d long since moved away from religion. She asked me to accompany her to youth group on campus, where she had lots of friends, and I said yes. I liked the idea of being introduced as a new girl to a new group. It was reminiscent of the feeling going into high school for the first time as the new, mysterious girl. I got to make an impression on people simply by being a new face and without having to say much. Of course, this was a temporary effect, and the novelty soon faded. But still, I was not shy about snatching up the chances when I saw them. I dressed conservatively but with attention to makeup and hair and attended youth group with her, scoping out the place for cute guys, of which there were plenty. One of the most beautiful melodies I’d ever heard was coming out of the piano lounge one afternoon after lunch. I assumed it was Kate playing so I headed inside, and there she was, playing “Mad World.” She had just learned it and was trying to perfect the tricky left hand part. She told me it was from Donnie Darko, so of course I went out later that day and bought the movie so I could watch it in my dorm room on my laptop. The version she was playing was a beautiful piano arrangement of the Tears for Fears song. I met only one girl that year who could flawlessly move from one group to the other along with me on occasion. Her name was Tanya, a beautiful modelesque black woman with the energy and appetite of four people combined. I swear she would regularly eat enough food to feed a whole family while the rest of us just watched, mesmerized. She was thin and perfect, and she shouldn’t have been with all that food going into her body. Not fair. I couldn’t hate her, though, she was about as close to that childlike innocence and presence as I’d ever experienced. She could get along with anyone and never said a mean word about anyone, either. She wasn’t a drinker but somehow managed to navigate drunken parties with me and Christine and still have fun with all of us idiots stumbling around. Then she could go to youth group with me and Kate and make friends and talk about her faith honestly and naturally. We were interesting together because of her intense energy and outgoingness. Somehow, I balanced this out and I was not intimidated by her, I think because it was so honest and free. I didn’t feel like she was ever judging me or pressuring me to be like her or anyone else. She just took people how they were, no matter what. So I was party, emo-wannabe, cool girl by night and religious musician by day. Somehow, I thought I could maintain my competitive Irish dancing at the preliminary championship level by going to one, one-hour private lesson a week. And I continued to go to these classes and compete, usually ranking somewhere in the middle, but occasionally getting one of those top three medal placements. My new social games and fascinating classes were a huge distraction, and my Irish dancing dreams moved to the back burner, replaced of this new juggling challenge. But two circles weren’t enough. Soon I would meet a group of guys (and one or two girls) who liked to play group games like capture the flag, four square, and hide and seek on campus at night. Part of this group was a guy named Dusty, who was also lead singer for a band that included himself and four other guys. When Kate and I met them and played four square one day, I saw a new persona forming. I could brush up on my tomboy and be a cool sporty girl who could run and play with the boys. I was excited about this. And as an added bonus, the singer, Dusty, seemed to have a crush on me, and soon I had an in for hanging out with the band at practices and even going to concerts. How cool is that? What girl doesn’t want to hang out with a group of boys in a band in college? Plus, I was “close” with the lead singer, who is kind of the leader, which gave me lots of those bonus points. I could be seen talking and hanging out with him at bars and venues, and people would assume I was close with him. I had no interest in him, he wasn’t very attractive to me, but I was indeed attracted to the idea of the status I could portray with him in public and within the group of guys around him. It makes me cringe to recount this reality to you, but it is very true. These are the feelings I had during this time, and they all revolved around portraying a social status that neither existed in real life nor had any real connection to the intimate friendships I was pretending I had. I was able to fool myself into believing my relationships with all the people and groups was real and substantial, but they would all disappear, one by one, as quickly and easily as they had appeared. At the beginning of this chapter, I wrote how my experience of friendship and intimacy is unique and different from what I’ve observed between the people around me. That invisible tether between friends is not something I feel, no matter how much time I spend with an individual, or how much we agree on this or that topic, or how many interests we have in common. I saw Joy and many of the girls I went to high school with pretty much every single day, including summers for summer band. But at the end of my senior year, I had separated from them without an ounce of regret or sadness, just like Amber. This tells me that either my experience of friendship is vastly different from a lot of other people’s, or I never actually formed a real connection with any of them to elicit the type of bond that could last. I don’t think it’s a simple thing, and I don’t think that I can attribute everything I experience in social settings solely to autism, as I mentioned before. However, I do believe that during my time in college, I put a great deal of effort into making those relationships I was faking into real, genuine ones. I knew my friendship with Christine was based completely on partying and that she would never be a “real” friend, but girls like Tanya could be different. Tanya and I exchanged secrets and conversations much easier than I could with anyone else. But even here, I would feel a kind of connection throughout a great conversation, but as soon as I left the party and went home, that tether was broken off instantaneously. It wasn’t like I had forgotten the conversation, but the closeness I felt I’d earned from the conversation would never stay. And this is the uniqueness I find in my experience of connection and friendship—it is incredibly high maintenance. My connection or fondness for someone can be very strong, but as soon as I am apart from them, it all but disappears except in the most rare of cases (like my husband, but that’s a whole different story to be shared later). Intimacy from others actually has a very intense fear-inducing effect on me. The idea of a friend coming up to me after a long time of not seeing one another and running at me to give me a hug actually makes me feel like I would have a panic attack. This is not something I experience. I’ve never had the feeling that I would just not be able to live without someone. And I think there are a lot of things mixed up in this. There is autism, for sure, but somewhere I’ve also picked up an intense fear of loss, abandonment, and rejection. The idea of someone being so important to me that my life would be severely affected without them seems like a nightmare, and I would never want to carry that burden. It is much easier to drop the significance of a relationship than to fear its loss at all times. Like a lot of things I’ve learned about life, I feel some of this can be attributed to the way the end of relationships is portrayed in movies. I’d seen the imitated heartbreak of broken and lost friendships enough times in movies to know that I would never want to experience it, perhaps. Or maybe this is the excuse I put in place to justify the fact that I never seem to be able to put in the effort to form an intimate relationship with someone. And still, on the other hand, I do know that this kind of intimacy is something I’ve always wanted very strongly but have never been able to realize until my husband came along. I Chapter 8: Asperger’s and Inauthentic Friendships would like to talk about some things that are more alarming than what I’ve mentioned in the previous pages in regard to partying as a young woman with Asperger’s. One of the most defining traits I think of when I remember my time in college is how incredibly naïve I was when it came to people, and boys specifically. I do think that I put myself in danger in a lot of situations that I barely even remember anymore, both because of the haze of binge drinking that was the routine during my freshman and sophomore years of college and the difficulty of realizing the extent to which I could leave myself vulnerable around people I did not even know. I played a dangerous game that, in my mind, was no more than an extension of the game that I had to play in high school. A game of social status in an environment where authentic relationships are a myth and everything is about competition for the attention of men. This was my paradigm, kept neatly separated from my alternate goals of doing well and getting good grades and fulfilling all my curiosities in some very fascinating classes. I easily put my safety in the hands of people with whom I would get drunk and party. I didn’t know these people any more than I knew my professors or classmates. It was just a requirement to get “in” with the people I was trying to impress—absolute trust and a generally carefree, don’t-give-a-fuck attitude. Joe had it, and I quickly realized he was pretty much the social center of every party he attended. And if I wanted to get anywhere near that kind of social status, I had to imitate him. He talked to anyone and everyone, he drank with anyone and everyone. He was always smiling, always “cool with whatever,” and so that’s how I wanted to be, too. But Christine and Tanya were the closest I had to friends who might take care of me if I became so intoxicated that I couldn’t get home or function properly. I am amazed that I was not ever left at some stranger’s house after a night of drinking or woken up on the street or in a parking lot. I consider myself pretty incredibly lucky to have survived college, honestly speaking. These people I called friends were no more than competition in a large sense, but it was still a circle I wanted to be a part of. I desperately wanted to belong somewhere and acquire that closeness that I witnessed between others in the group, despite my not even knowing what that meant. I explain all this as a way to come to a word of caution. I regret that this game which was at the center of my thought process often took the place of rational decision-making. I could easily give up concern for my own safety if I thought it was something everyone else expected from me, perhaps more out of fear of sticking out or getting kicked from the group than anything else. Christine is getting in the car with that strange guy from the bar? Of course I’m going with her, why would I stay here alone? Or call a cab? It will be fine, and this is what cool, carefree, badass college girls do. As long as I’m with Christine, I’m cool. From the conversations and testimonies I’ve had with other women on the spectrum or who were diagnosed much later in life, naiveté is a very common concern as a young adult. Because we haven’t had the experience or lack the understanding of authentic or close friendships, we substitute what we think we’ve accomplished in this area and can easily end up trusting the wrong people or making decisions that are not in our best interest in an effort to maintain what we truly hope are authentic relationships, with which trust comes automatically. In my case, the degree to which I felt the compulsive need to compete as a cool, sexy party girl in college culminated in my being left alone with a boy, who was also drunk, outside on the balcony of an apartment on campus. I told him some such nonsense about being sexier and better than the other girls, and then he grabbed my hand and shoved it down the front of his pants, then held it there until I started jerking him off. My thoughts in those moments were not, he’s taking advantage of me, I should stop, this isn’t something I want to do, or please, someone come outside and stop this. No, my thought in those moments was, god, I hope I’m doing this right. The next day, he ran into me randomly on the pathway between a couple of buildings on campus, and it seemed as though he didn’t even know who I was. I wish I could say that I’d learned a valuable lesson and did some serious growing up in terms of trust and relationships and men in general, but it would be many years before I began to realize how large the scope of my naïve nature really was. Later on in my college career, this childishness would again be taken advantage of; this time less physically invasive and more emotionally manipulative. I’d responded to a message on Facebook from someone who was looking for a study partner in the Japanese studies class I was taking. I don’t remember the details, but after messaging back and forth and finding out he also was fascinated by Japan and was interested in playing music and recording, I decided I would approach him during our next class. A few days later, I sat in the back row, as usual, and noticed someone who looked a little like the picture online. He turned and searched for the face of the voice that answered to my name as it was called in roll call. On a side note, face identification between real life and photos has always been nearly impossible for me. If the face does not look exactly the same, wearing the exact same expression, I cannot pick out a face from a crowd to match with a photo. It is always fascinating and puzzling when this happens in a crime drama, when the detective discovers a suspect out in the real world and compares it to a picture where they have different hair, different clothing, etc. His name was Jake, and he did not seem concerned with being obvious about checking me out during and after roll call. He was sitting just in front of me and to my left. After class, he seemed to forget all about me and made no move to get up but messed with his things unproductively until I walked around the long table and approached him to say hello. He looked up, then down and back up, then finally said hello back. I remember feeling weird about him checking me out right in front of me, but I don’t think I thought much of it until later. He invited me to go eat, and at some point said he was working on a music project and wanted to see if I could play the keyboards for a track. We soon ended up hanging out and, I guess, becoming friends. Even now, the term sounds weird to apply to this relationship, as it took many very quick and unexpected turns during the course of our knowing one another. We came up with an agreement to make the workload of class lighter on both of us. I would write the papers and he would create the required maps and diagrams for the homework. It did lighten the tedious homework load significantly, and I was thankful for the arrangement, as was he. I began regularly coming over to his apartment, one he shared with a roommate whose name I don’t remember. He had some rudimentary recording equipment and was using a pirated copy of Cubase to record. I was enamored at the idea of recording some of the music I’d been playing for years, perhaps even getting the nerve up to sing. I had a keyboard, and he suggested I bring it over to his house so I wouldn’t have to lug it back and forth all the time. I agreed. One evening, I was over at his apartment, in his bedroom, watching an anime called Bleach. It was starting to get late, and he suggested that I was welcome to stay over, with him, in his room, so that I didn’t have to drive back to my dorm in the dark (something I’ve always felt a little anxious about doing). Any college girl with a little real-world experience would probably have immediately seen that he was trying to get me to stay and sleep with him. I did not catch on to this, even as he motioned to his bed, assuring me that there was plenty of room for the two of us. And even later that evening and into the next morning, I assumed that our sleeping together was just something that had happened naturally and in the moment. I got into the bed beside him and he gradually moved his arms to hold me and grab my hips. After this, he got more free with his hands and I made a mental switch in my brain, like I’d received a signal to begin pulling from everything I’d learned and experienced about sex in order to properly execute the task before me to the best of my ability. Every movement I made was smooth and calculated, I made noise, but not too loudly or annoyingly, mixes of whispers, low moans in the appropriate places. It was so emotionally void and methodical, I still don’t know how to explain or understand why I was there doing this. But one thing I felt very certain of is that I was basically held captive, almost to the point of suffocation, by my anxiety, and I truly did not feel I had the choice to not proceed. There was no panic, no sadness, just anxiety about “getting it right,” similar to my last unfortunate experience with a strange man where things turned sexual unexpectedly. Whether or not I really wanted to do it was irrelevant, and not even that important. It was happening, and it would not be cool for me to stop it and leave. He might not want to hang out with me anymore, and at that point I’d stopped hanging out with that group of party friends from freshman year, so I didn’t want to lose this bunch of social points I could hold on to. Besides, this meant I finally had another real boyfriend, and that sounded like it could be cool. He wasn’t particularly attractive, but again, it’s all part of a game, and the only thing that matters is moving as smoothly along the trajectory of life so as not to make waves or draw attention to one’s self that is in any way negative. Therefore, we had sex. The next morning, I brought up the concept of calling him my boyfriend, and he said absolutely nothing in response. I shrugged it off and changed the subject in order to ward off the awkward silence growing between us, then I left. I saw him shortly thereafter on campus and was disappointed to hear that he was not interested in being my boyfriend. This was one of the most confusing things I’d experienced in my life to this point. But we had sex, that means we are boyfriend and girlfriend…that’s how it works. Why the hell did he fuck me if he didn’t have those kinds of feelings for me? I genuinely could not work this out in my head, and over the years, talking with various women in support groups online and Facebook groups for women with autism and reading memoirs and books about and by women on the spectrum, I consider myself incredibly lucky to have gotten through these confusing and risky years as easily as I did. I’ve read research that suggests that women on the spectrum have emotional intelligence equal to their age minus one third. That means that at around age 21, I was about as ready for understanding what a relationship like this meant as a 14-year-old. But many women are not nearly as lucky as me, having been sexually abused and seen as easy prey because of an unusual childlike-ness and naivete, even late into their teenage years. This has got to be one of the greatest dangers of it being so difficult to detect and diagnose ASD in women. We masterfully develop the ability to mask and fit into society socially on the surface but end up woefully unprepared for the intimacy and intricacy of personal, intimate relationships and are much more susceptible to sexual and emotional abuse and manipulation than neurotypical women. This experience only exacerbated the social anxieties that existed in the first place, in my case leading to a sometimes overwhelming anxiety experienced around any and all men, regardless of how well I know them or for how long. In the case of my experience with Jake, the result was that my ability to be involved in friendships with members of the opposite sex was severely impaired. I would permanently carry this lesson I’d learned that men could not be just friends with women, that there was always a sexual motive, either romantic or predatorial. And this was an easy paradigm for me to adopt because I had never developed a blueprint for how friendships between different sexes was supposed to work. My usual tutors in the social realm—movies—had certainly backed up this view, after all (thank you, When Harry Met Sally), and there was also a wealth of love stories that featured the evolution from childhood friendship to romantic relationship later in life. Men interacted with women for two dominant reasons—either to hurt them or fuck them. The resentment those negative experiences bred had rooted themselves far deeper than any positive experiences I’d had with boys like Andy, whom I would have written off as childish play at that point anyway. From this point forward, Jake and I were basically “friends with benefits,” which I decided still won me some cool points, and so I was ok with it. I was, after all, at least having sex again, and this made me feel much more mature than I really was. But the real damage had yet to be done. We smoothly carried on with this relationship, playing music, playing video games, recording, and almost always fucking before our visits ended. He’d never managed to secure an orgasm from me, despite occasionally having sex for up to three hours at a time. After a while, he made it clear that this was really starting to bug him, to the point that he would get upset. During sex one night, he informed me that it was my fault that I couldn’t come, and that I wasn’t “focusing” hard enough. I thought, what the hell am I supposed to focus on? But I didn’t say anything, just nodded guiltily and apologized, saying I’d “work on it.” After several more attempts, we were having sex one night in the same bed as the first night I’d stayed over. He said to me, in the middle of sex, that he was ready to start an official relationship with me and suggested, “come on, this will be your first orgasm as my girlfriend.” I was pleased, I suppose, but I also didn’t appreciate the distraction during a task which required a great deal of “focus,” and so I just briefly acknowledged the sentiment and continued to perform to the best of my ability. This tactic did not work. And I only realized it was a tactic a few days later when he told me he wasn’t really serious and that we wouldn’t work as girlfriend and boyfriend. He delivered this news to me softly and through language that made it sound like there was logic behind his reasoning, while assuring me that he valued our friendship. I was able to put 2 and 2 together and realized that he only told me he’d be my boyfriend to see if that would get me to come while we were having sex. What is striking to me at this point in my life as I revisit this experience is that at this point, this kind of behavior from men was completely normalized in my mind, to the point that I did not feel betrayed or upset by this revelation; I simply accepted it. Men needed sex, and they needed to be validated by getting women to have orgasms during sex. He’d admitted a few times that he felt like a prisoner to his sexuality and that sometimes it was a burden. I applied this revelation on a large scale and over time decided that all men were essentially prisoners to their sexuality, and that they couldn’t help being predatorial or manipulative, in some cases, as a survival mechanism. Ethics and the morality of it weren’t relevant. I didn’t subscribe to a moral code of ethics, and essentially no longer believed in the concepts of right or wrong. There was simply survival, animal instinct, death. Human action either hurt people or helped them. But there was no big man upstairs to label things according to a perfect standard of “right” in the right column and “wrong” in the left column. These ideas were absurd to me and followed from my recent fascination and study of existentialism and the writings of Albert Camus and Sartre. Eventually Jake’s and my “friendship” would end quite abruptly when he came back to his apartment after work one night. I was already there doing some editing on a track we’d recently recorded. He walked in the front door and I heard a young girl’s voice with him. He came into the room and introduced me to this girl, a little shorter and slightly more plump than me. She followed Jake to his computer chair, then sat down on his lap… It took everything in me to contain the feelings that exploded within me in that moment. I had to get out. I casually explained what I’d been working on, doing everything I could to not let on how upset I was, then said that I thought I’d left something in my car that I needed. Jake could faintly detect that I was upset, I think, and followed me out to my car, instructing the young girl to stay in his room. I don’t remember the exact words that were shared between us in those moments, but the gist was that I absolutely never wanted to speak to or see him ever again. Period. I drove off leaving him standing there, his mouth wide open, utterly confused. That was fine. It wasn’t my problem that he didn’t understand what had just happened. I wasn’t even concerned with dissecting exactly how I felt or why. After all, I’d worked for weeks on the acceptance that sex and friendship should be able to go together with zero emotional attachment. But this test had proved me incredibly wrong in terms of where I thought I’d gotten to emotionally. Jake called and texted so much over the next few days that I had to block his number, then delete him from my Facebook friends. I answered the phone on one last call, and he begged me to just explain to him what he did wrong. I simply told him to figure it out, then hung up. Cold. Unforgiving. I had completely dropped him without hesitation or difficulty. He was out of my life. I didn’t miss him, despite all of the time we’d spent together and the friendship I thought we had cultivated. The betrayal of bringing home another girl into our space, where we had regularly ended up fucking every single time we saw each other, was too much. I discarded him instantaneously like a piece of trash. But his confusion did give me pause, at least for a day or two. He was genuinely confused. Had I overreacted? I guess it should have been ok for him to be with someone else romantically, since we weren’t officially together…but did that mean she was ok with us fucking, too? I don’t care what kind of crazy mentality people are able to conjure in this world nowadays, I simply couldn’t believe you could have sex with someone regularly and maintain zero feelings for that person above the platonic level. Essentially (I would never have admitted it at the time out of pride), I do think a lot of it had to do with losing in the ever-pervasive game. I had lost to this girl. On some level, he was bored with me and had gone out of his way to replace me. Part of it was an immediate reaction to the realization that I was expecting sex that night, and now that plan was obviously different (unless, of course, he was expecting a threesome, which never crossed my mind until just now). As a lot of Aspies will tell you, disruption of routine or a plan is not something we handle easily or with grace. I left Jake’s apartment, and his life, without even a second’s hesitation. I left my two hundred-dollar keyboard there and never asked for it back or if I could come and get it. I genuinely did not ever want to interact with him again. I think I answered that last call just to get one last jab in for my own satisfaction. This experience essentially poisoned my perception of and ability to form and appreciate friendship to a large extent, and I still don’t believe I will ever be able to sort out all the ins and outs of my difficulties with friendship in general, but it is especially poignant with men. I don’t believe Jake is the sole origin, however. Throughout my time in college, the men I regularly interacted with at parties and on campus were all essentially the same, at least to me. They all wanted the pretty, hot, or cool girls, and they wanted sex. Not much else going on in those brains. Most of the women I hung out with had the monopoly on the pretty and sexy part, so I concentrated on being the mysterious cool girl in the group, though I never intended to have sex with these men. Sometimes it worked and sometimes it didn’t, but I had a niche to fill. I had a direction, to some degree. But this was just part of the game. If I could steal points away from the hot girls by making out with a cute guy in the middle of the living room at a party—absolutely, I went for it. And I was proud. I would get drunk and tease men, make out with them, then leave abruptly, not actually wanting anything physical to happen. This earned me the nickname of “cock tease” at some point. Of this I was also proud, as Christine thought it was funny, and she was what all the boys wanted, so…win. Sometimes I could raise my status at the party by dancing and making out with Christine. We could be the center of attention, and for a few moments I could share in the desire that I felt always revolved around Christine in public like an aura. It’s not easy for me to revisit and admit in writing to the mentality and behavior that framed my freshman and sophomore years of college, but I do think it is important to highlight the dangers, about which I did not fully realize until much later, of being exposed to such an environment as a young woman with undiagnosed ASD. I think that there is a large number of sexual abuse incidents that involve women on the spectrum which are never even shared with other people, let alone reported, out of shame and self-blame. To this day I do not consider myself a victim of sexual abuse in any way. I consider myself a woman who was really stupid in college and I believe it was my fault for getting in those situations. This may not be altogether healthy, but I also consider myself a very mild case study in the occurrence of sexual abuse in general, and I don’t want to imagine what may have happened if I was one of the really pretty girls and had gotten mixed up with men with more insidious intentions. I know it is different for each person with autism, but in the case of women, I do believe the danger lies in an unknown vulnerability that lies in naivete and an overly trusting nature. The unfortunate aspect is that there is not just one solid source for this evolution of thought, nor a clear set of motivations that puts women on the spectrum on the path to harm. I was naïve, overly trusting, and also motivated by the idea that to be an attractive, worthwhile woman I had to be sexy and maintain the attention of men, preferably in competition with other women. Many women on the spectrum may not put themselves in harm’s way like this because they do not feel the conviction of the “game” as I’ve described but may be isolated. They may still harbor that lack of experience and overly trusting nature that can lead to trusting the wrong person in the wrong situation for a host of other reasons. I also believe that the pressure experienced by a woman on the spectrum who also experiences the comorbid disorder of social anxiety is much more intense than has been acknowledged or studied. As I indicated previously, and with complete honesty, the sole reason for engaging in sex for the first time with Jake was in reaction to the anxiety and fear of committing the social faux pas of hesitating and interrupting the flow of expected events. When you spend a lot of time lost in the river where everyone else seems to be effortlessly paddling away, you learn to accept that in most situations where you feel awkward, they are right, and you are wrong. It may seem absurd to many people that this seemingly insignificant barrier could present itself like a brick wall, but let me assure you, this is absolutely the case. Through my intense fear and anxiety of sticking out in a negative way, I internalized the value that social interactions should be smooth, cool, easy, and uninterrupted. The practice of mirroring and “camouflaging” is an effort to keep everything at an even keel and to not cause any suspicion or upset. Many women, on the spectrum or not, hold back on their heightened emotions in public out of fear of being too loud or overbearing, the thought of being talked about behind one’s back too unbearable to risk. For these reasons, I feel that having more easily accessible avenues for the treatment of anxiety, as well as depression, on college campuses is something that is desperately needed today. I remember going to a freshman orientation where various clubs and school organizations had set up tables and pamphlets to hand out. I think there should have been a big table with a sign showing a URL for a website where kids could go to talk to counselors or receive information and advice and active resources for dealing with anxiety and other common disorders like depression and ADHD. It would have just needed to be posted in a way that you could just look and memorize a simple website address, not in a way that forced someone to go up to a table and pick up a card or a piece of paper, which would essentially advertise that they needed help. After all, someone who is socially anxious is not going to do anything publicly to address their situation, and the absence of non-intimidating or anxiety-inducing avenues to help is a massive shortcoming during a time when emotional and mental difficulties are challenged to possibly the highest degree of a person’s life. I said before that I count myself lucky for having gotten out of college without anything really serious happening to me. In my final year of college, months before graduation and after I’d met my now-husband Graham, I went to a bar with someone I knew as an acquaintance in one of my classes. We’d worked together on a project and decided it would be fun to meet up and hang out at a bar. She brought a friend or two with her. At the bar, we both drank heavily, and we started talking to a couple of guys. I don’t remember hardly a thing about either of them, but it had been a long time since I’d been out socializing and partying like I used to, so I felt a little like that person who could be cool and flirty and attractive. At some point, after both this girl and I were completely trashed, she decided she was ready to go home. The guys had mentioned coming over to their house to hang out. In my inebriated mind, this was major cool points— going home with a couple guys we met at the bar. I was disappointed to hear that Shayna really wanted to head home, but under a bit of pressure from the guys, I agreed to leave the bar with them. I remember Shayna leaving and the bartender saying something to the boys like, “you take care of her, you hear?” They said something reassuring, then led me to their car. I was too drunk to think straight, obviously, and these actions I was taking were securely in the column of cool, attractive, and sexy girl in the graph I’d been constructing for years. Cool sexy girls flirted with guys and if they asked them out, they went. I did not doubt their honesty or their behavior in the slightest. This goes back to the blind trust I tended to foster toward people, even complete strangers. I believed the words that people said to me, and these guys just wanted to hang out, then they would take me home. I remember vaguely as I was riding in the car that I started to regret my decision. I was doing everything I could to hold it together. I hadn’t been that drunk in a very long time. At one point, one of the boys said something like, “you know, you kinda owe us a favor for taking you home.” They both chuckled, and I chuckled right along with them, sure they were kidding. We arrived a short ride later at a house. The only thing I remember about what it looked like inside or out was brown. I walked into the house and there was a small living room with chairs along the wall. I made my way in a zig zag pattern to one of the chairs and sat down. It was one of those bare wooden kitchen chairs with no cushion. It wasn’t very comfortable, but that wasn’t really relevant. They brought me a bottle of cheap beer, Coors Light or something like that. I remember sitting in that room for a few minutes maybe, I don’t really know. There was an older man there who joined us. He sat in a chair to my right, the boys in chairs to my left. The next thing I remember is walking briskly out the front door again without a word, then crouching outside in the cold near the edge of the driveway. I was nearly hyperventilating, wanting desperately to throw up, anything to relieve the way I was feeling. To this day I can’t describe exactly what I was feeling, but I’m sure lots of things played into it, and it was absolutely hellish. Being drunk, anxious, confused, maybe as clarity very slowly returned to me, I began to feel scared. One of the boys came out after me and yelled at me to stop. I remember him speaking very harshly to me, “Stop it! You fucking stop it right now!” I don’t remember how long I was out there. Eventually I was back in the car, the boys finally deciding to take me back to my apartment, though they were upset. It didn’t help that a few minutes into the car ride, I vomited all over the back seat of the car. This resulted in more yelling and cussing from one of the boys, the friend of the one driving the car. I remember it was that guy’s car, and he was much more gracious than his friend, who continued to yell at me. The driver kept trying to calm his friend down, saying it was ok. But his friend just kept repeating things like, “you puked in my friend’s car! Fuck you! No man, fuck her!” Somehow I was lucid enough to tell them where I lived and they drove into the parking lot and the guy who was yelling told me to get the fuck out of the car. I did, saying sorry over and over. But this just made him even madder. As soon as I was out of the car, they left. And that was that. I remember briefly panicking and hoping I still had my dorm keys. I don’t know how I was able to hang on and remember my purse through all of this, but I did. I fished out my keys and stumbled up the two flights of stairs to the door of my apartment. I assume I instantly fell asleep as soon as I made it to my room, the whole time trying to think and figure out why I had decided to leave with them. Why did I think that was the cool thing to do? Why was I so stupid? That night haunted me for a long time. I was ashamed and embarrassed to tell anyone about it. But I cringe to think of how much worse it could have been for me that night. All because I thought I was doing what I was supposed to do. Granted, I would probably not have made the same choices had I not been so drunk, but it was careless for me to trust this girl I barely knew from class to watch out for me in the first place. She had no problem leaving me with those guys. But then again, I was an adult, and it wasn’t her job to take care of me. That’s something that friends do, but friendship and how to tell whether someone is a friend, or when that happens, is one of the ultimate enigmas for nearly every Aspie I’ve ever talked to. Friendship is an abstract concept that I try to materialize by checking boxes off on a list. It isn’t something I feel. I had no idea I couldn’t trust Shayna the same way I trusted Joy. And this is still a blind spot for me today. But in compensation, I tend to be very reserved when it comes to trusting people or asking for help in general. After all, in my mind, if I’m not sure how to discern who is trustworthy, it is much safer to trust no one, right? As I wrote about in previous chapters, friendships throughout my young adult life were, for the most part, association-based. There were girls I spent a lot of time around because we were in color guard together, dance classes together, show choir, other school classes, etc. When I spent time with friends outside of any of these contexts, there was nearly always an agenda, and that agenda most often had to do with a boy or making an appearance. The intimate conversations I shared were with a small pool of people, limited to boys I was trying to impress or talking about myself to female friends…usually about those boys. When confronted with a friend, like Joy in high school, wanting to talk to me about a problem in her life, I always felt a wave of anxiety and discomfort. Not because I didn’t care that she was in pain, because I think I do have the capacity to care deeply for friends, but because I didn’t know how to be the friend with comforting words. I have no idea what to say in those situations. Especially if it is something I’ve never experienced myself. If a friend had come up to me in high school and told me her father was beating her, I would have no idea what to say or do. I would probably get as far as a look of shock, then I might scramble for something to say, and it would most likely be weird and inappropriate. I had an experience recently with a friend’s father passing away. I had to really think about what I was supposed to say to her the next time I saw her, and I carefully took cues from other friends who were around me. It makes me feel bad that I don’t share this very human empathy all the time for other people, even those who are closest to me. But on the other hand, I have this strange capacity to be overcome with compassion for other people, usually complete strangers. The most common experience I have with this occurs when I see someone with visible mental illness demonstrated by odd hand/arm placement and facial expressions, etc. Sometimes I am so overcome with compassion that I really want to go over and give them a hug, though I have the good sense to know this wouldn’t be a good idea. In my mind, when I see them, I think about the struggles they have to go through in a neurotypical world, and I think about the possibility that there are other mental disorders going on under the surface as a result of this, like anxiety and depression, and it makes my heart break. I can’t quite put my finger on why this reaction happens. I was never bullied as a kid (that I can recall or was aware of), and I remember these occurrences happening early in life before I was acquainted with depression or autism. I also have very strong reactions to events in movies. I empathize powerfully with characters in movies, and it boggles my mind that I don’t have this same experience with the real people in my life who love and care about me. I made an observation once in one of my journals about how you see a car crash in a movie and it is very sad and dramatic, especially if it involves the main characters, but if you drive by a car crash out on the highway one afternoon, there is no real sadness, just fascination as people try to sneak a peak as they slowly drive by the congested traffic. It occurred to me much later that this may just be me, and that others do actually feel a sense of concern when they see things like this in real life or on the news. This, of course, further made me feel like a monster. Again, I am more likely to feel something for complete strangers or fictional characters than for my next-door neighbor whose husband recently passed away, or for a friend who is struggling with something personal. This is a real mystery to me, and something I hope I gain some knowledge about some day. I can say that as I’ve grown older, I have learned a great deal about what makes a real friend and how to tell when someone is really doing something for my best interest or their own. I’ll be talking more about the friends in my life a bit later as the timeline progresses, but as this chapter focuses on friendship and the dangers of inauthentic friendships for women on the spectrum, I wanted to share some insight into what I believe is required for a woman in my position to learn and apply new wisdom regarding authentic relationships. Sadly, the connection I’ve missed throughout my entire life continues to evade me, with the exception of my husband. The friends I formed organically have all but fallen completely by the wayside, and the friends I find myself surrounded by now sometimes feel like strangers. The group of friends I refer to now are those to whom I was introduced by my husband after we started dating. What has saved me from devastating loneliness is the tenacity of these friends to continue treating me like they treat other close friends without condemning me for my strange mannerisms, occasional accidental bluntness, or need to withdraw from social events if I’m overloaded. I’ve had very interesting conversations with all of them, and I’ve appreciated their company and had loads of fun being absurd and obscene. Our collective sense of humor is decidedly inappropriate and would shock many in more conservative circles. This can sometimes be overwhelming and embarrassing, though, as there are lots of things I don’t feel comfortable joking about or revealing about myself. But I survive, and most of the time our meetups are a lot of fun. I don’t feel especially comfortable meeting or hanging out with just one of them, especially the guys for reasons already discussed, and I would never feel comfortable calling one of them to talk or meet for support in a time of acute anxiety, depression, or anything else I could be struggling with, any more than I would feel comfortable calling a stranger to talk about these things. To me, it would be an incredibly intrusive thing to call or text a friend to talk about something I needed to work through. I think this is reflective of how I would feel if this happened to me (and it doesn’t, which is probably best). I struggle a great deal with being a supportive friend, especially if I am alone in the endeavor. I would do my absolute best, for sure. I’m not saying I would just run away at the first sign of an anxiety spike and hide. But it would be a struggle, I’m sure, to navigate my way through that situation, and I would definitely utilize any resource at my disposal and reach out to other friends who know what to do and say nearly 100% of the time. But there is another facet to this experience of empathy and non-empathy that can also be confusing and guilt-inducing. I find, even now, that my capacity for empathy toward other people who struggle with conditions and struggles similar to my own can be very limited, and can also conjure agitation, feelings of annoyance and even anger and intolerance. I criticize, inwardly, anytime someone deals with an emotional struggle differently than I would handle it, and immediately condemn them as wrong before thinking things through more thoroughly. These reactions tend to be impulsive. I could hear about a friend getting in a fight with someone at work or yelling or feeling upset or depressed or anxious and I immediately feel disgust towards them, not empathy. I’ve only ever voiced these kinds of reactions on a few occasions, but have immediately regretted opening my mouth, knowing that my judgments are completely unfair. But why do I feel this way? My only insight is that this is also a reflective reaction, reacting to what disgusts me about my own struggles. I tend to condemn people as weak or childish for not being able to handle emotional struggles, even as I am aware of how much I suffer myself. Where is the compassion that seems to pop up elsewhere randomly towards complete strangers? Despite all of these limitations, my friendships work. And they work beautifully. They are fulfilling to the highest degree they can be, and we all get along very well. The secret is undoubtedly their own dedication to providing excellent models for what true, authentic friendships are supposed to look like. It is through this modeling that I’ve learned a great deal about why friendship is important, and I’ve learned to appreciate this way more than I ever had before meeting them. I am eternally grateful for their presence, even when it feels impossible to express it, and I’ve jumped a few very high hurdles throughout our years together through my being able to put my guard down and show vulnerability. This would not have been possible without the certainty and confidence in the authenticity of their affection for me as a friend, and as a part of their family. I Chapter 9: New Obsessions was introduced to Bob Dylan for the first time in a Starbucks near campus on an outing with my mother. I picked up a multi-CD pack called “No Direction Home.” I’d started to pick up on some of the major college clichés that seemed to exist ubiquitously across the US. One of them was Bob Dylan and folk music. Bob Dylan was my next big obsession cycle, and it lasted for two years. I learned to play more intricate finger style guitar as I learned his songs from tabs. I was pretty good, and I had the focus to sit down and learn these songs note by note, much like I had to do to learn a song on the piano. Without the skill of sight reading, I would painstakingly go through the “Every Good Boy Does Fine” and “Good Boys Do Fine Always” in my head to find each and every note on the treble and bass clefs, then I would have to memorize those notes, usually just one bar at a time. One of the aspects I consider a great gift with my Asperger’s is this ability to completely hyper-focus and dedicate myself to a task that might prove too tedious and exhausting for others. I’ve used this skill on each creative endeavor in my life, and at this time, it was fingerstyle folk guitar songs. I could also sing, and one of my favorite things to do when it was nice outside was to coax Kate into coming out to the quad somewhere with me and my guitar where we would sing and play together. I loved playing my own songs as well. In my head, people would walk by and hear and admire, maybe someday some cute guy would come over and listen and talk and smile. An absurd thought, as on the rare occasions when someone actually did stop to listen, I got so nervous and self-conscious that I stopped singing, though I could still manage to continue playing most of the time. The same phenomena existed in the piano lounge inside the student union. I loved to go in there, people sitting around quietly doing homework, and play. But the moment anyone came up to me to comment on my playing or share something about themselves, I would be overcome with self-consciousness and sometimes forget how to play anything. I hated it, but it didn’t stop me from daydreaming about being able to do it someday— to perform in front of people and be amazing and confident. I convinced myself that I just needed the “right” audience or the “right” coach to come along and be so in love with my talent that he/she would offer to help me get over the stage fright and set up performances for me and everything. That happens, right? Why shouldn’t it? I began to watch every single documentary and piece of film I could get my hands on that featured Bob Dylan. This was also the beginning of my lifelong obsession with documentaries, of which I’ve seen probably a thousand at this point. No Direction Home was a brilliant documentary. I quickly moved on to D.A. Pennebaker’s Don’t Look Back and a few others which captured footage from his performances at folk festivals. His melodies and words haunted me, but perhaps his story was what captivated me most, touching the romantic, ambitious part of me that still felt like there was so much out there for me to accomplish. I decided that I would write my own songs and learn to perform them in front of people…some day. For right now, it was enough for me to be learning and practicing on campus. I’d also latched on to philosophy and become enamored with existentialist writer Albert Camus as a consequence of one of my elective courses. I read his essay “The Myth of Sisyphus” and felt his words deeply as an echo of my own inner truths, which I’d never been able to put into words. I could probably write a whole book on what I think of him, but I will limit my thoughts to the chapter on obsession at the end of this book. One other minor obsession during this time in my college career, spanning from my freshman to junior year, was Pink Floyd—another predictable college trope. I was introduced to them by Derek, Joe’s strange sidekick. I loved the beauty and emotion of the guitars, the strange sounds which reminded me of the melancholy and ethereal sounds I’d consumed through Enigma. As I was already on a guitar kick with Bob Dylan, it was an easy transition to become obsessed with the electric guitar and the emotional solos from David Gilmour. I immediately looked up how to play the song “Wish You Were Here” and added it to my repertoire for the quad. My brother had started going to Wright State right behind me as a freshman when I was a junior. He decided to pursue a degree in film, and his love for movies soon rubbed off on me and became another obsession which I took on quite methodically. I would borrow his film studies books and pick a genre or director and just watch all the movies that were considered important in that area. On the academic side of things, I’d decided, after changing my mind several times, that I would major in English. I liked reading and discovering new interests through reading, so why not? I thought maybe I could travel and teach English. I had no real concept of how I would turn an English degree into a career, but I was feeling the pressure to decide so that I could begin getting through those courses to finish in the standard four-year time frame. I knew it wasn’t a degree that would lead to a prestigious, lucrative career. I’d heard the jokes about liberal arts majors over and over, but I didn’t care in the slightest. I just wanted to take those fascinating classes, where I ended up falling in love with “modernist” writers of the early 20th century from Great Britain. I read Heart of Darkness by Joseph Conrad and poems from T.S. Eliot and W.B. Yeats. Essays and stories by Virginia Woolf, and Tess of the D’Ubervilles by Thomas Hardy, and A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man by James Joyce, just to name a few. At the same time, I was taking some creative writing courses, and these unconventional styles of literature influenced how I wrote my short stories. I would soon declare an English major “with an emphasis on creative writing.” In this whirlwind of activity and new interests and visions for myself, my life changed dramatically from a fairly linear set of goals—dance, compete, get into Lord of the Dance, tour the world—to this unpredictable and transient collection of goals that was always changing and adapting according to whatever fire was in my heart. Oftentimes I did feel like there was just “too much I wanted to do” and sometimes I felt like I couldn’t do all of it. This was absolutely true. Much as I’d compared and contrasted myself with other girls who I considered successful in their being pretty, popular, and attractive, I began comparing myself along the timeline of Bob Dylan’s life. I thought, okay, he left home at this age and started playing out and getting noticed at this age, so I have this much time if I think I’m as good as he is and deserve the same. These thoughts were completely natural in my mind. I considered myself exceptional, and I did not consider anything as a real deterrent to accomplishing whatever I wanted. I was still that child, hanging on to life as this big, wonderful, do-anything-you-want-to possibility of adventure and fame…what else was there to live for, after all? I’d experienced consistently how natural talent could carry me to success in Irish dance, and I saw no reason to believe I couldn’t do the same with music, or writing, or whatever. As the partying and drinking and friends began to diminish in my third and fourth years of college, these ambitions became bigger in my mind. When I met Jake in September of my senior year, I thought I’d finally found the ticket out. He would help me get discovered by recording my voice and music and I’d be on my way. After that ended horribly, and almost immediately on the heels of saying that I never wanted him to contact me again, I met someone new. It was in a poetry class where I first became aware of Graham, who would not formally introduce himself until a few weeks later. He volunteered one day to recite a poem by a Scottish writer in a Scottish accent, and he actually pulled it off quite impressively. I didn’t know much about him until one day when I’d recited one of my latest poems for the class. I was consistently receiving praise from my classmates for my poetry writing. It was mostly nonsensical and presumptuous, but the words in my mind sounded beautiful, with just enough sense to sound profound and abstract. After class that day in October, I was walking out of Milleck Hall with Kate when he came up to me and said, “What does it mean?” These words are not in my canon of appropriate conversation starters, so I feigned a look of confusion and asked him to repeat himself. “Your poem, what does it mean?” Now, when we’re talking about Aspies, this is actually a pretty awesome way to begin a first conversation. There was no obligatory introductory nonsense about what I was majoring in, how I liked the class, blah blah blah. Just straight to the point—a direct question about something I’d created that I obviously felt strongly about. I don’t think I realized it immediately, but the effect of this particular introduction was more impressive than I could gather in the moment. He walked as he talked, keeping pace with me and Kate perfectly without getting in the way. The look on his face was so serious, as if he was actually curious about my poem. I stumbled through an explanation awkwardly, having been put on the spot. I was unsure about what was happening. Was he hitting on me, or was he actually interested in my writing? Well, I suppose the answer was both. And I figured it out quite quickly as by the time the three of us had walked from Milleck Hall to the Student Union, he’d asked me if I wanted to hang out at the coffee shop outside the library. I said I would, and we set a date for the following afternoon. He suddenly walked briskly away, wearing a black trench coat and sporting a neatly trimmed goatee. Kate and I giggled and talked a bit afterwards before parting ways. From that night through the following day, I was nervous. There are not a lot of social situations out there that do not make me nervous. There was a small coffee shop inside the library then. Outside there were a few tables with umbrellas. Even though it was a little chilly, we met up, he bought me a mocha, and we went to sit outside and talk. He was immediately interesting to talk to, and again, he favored cutting out the bullshit before real conversations are supposed to begin. We talked about many things, but the one topic that stands out the most in my memory is anarchy. He had all these interesting arguments for anarchy, and I listened with a pleasant mixture of amusement and fascination. The details of his arguments have faded with time, and he assures me now that they weren’t as maddeningly brilliant as he may have presented them at the time. I knew by now that he was certainly interested in me, and I once again adopted the role of a girl being “courted.” It was important that I exuded the charm and intelligence that I knew were attractive, but to also let a little humor and nerdiness come through. I felt assured at that point that I knew what men wanted, with small varying differences according to each personality. It felt very good to have someone interested in me again, having just broken off the friends-with-benefits situation with Jake. After our conversation that day, he asked again if I’d like to meet him and talk. I said yes. I’d given him my number, and he began to text me and ask to meet up quite often. At some point over the following week or so after we’d met, I told him through a text (I believe) that he seemed to be a little obsessive. I did not get a reply to this. He would usually reply to a text from me almost immediately. So when I did not receive a reply, even in the next hour, then two hours, I began to worry that I’d upset him. I waited a little longer, until that evening. I finally sent him another text… “I miss you.” He was working at a video rental store at the time, and a friend that he worked with got to listen to him talk about how he’d met this girl. I think Graham told his coworker all about the situation and said that the only thing he could do was stop communicating with me. If I sent him another text, that meant it was going to work out. He did respond to this last text, and I think there was a smiley face involved. We met up again and laughed over the situation. I explained to him that it was unusual for me to experience so much attention from a guy, and he said that he understood. As the fall quarter went on, our relationship grew. We started to meet up more often, all over campus. I would often see him outside one of the buildings smoking a cigarette in a little huddle of other people, trying to keep warm. He was nearly always wearing that black trench coat, as well as a pair of fingerless gloves. So far, so good. I understood the mechanics of human behavior when it came to dating, though most of my practice had come from a kind of miniature speed dating environment at parties where I would meet a random guy or two and charm him to the best of my ability for a few hours before leaving abruptly. I knew from watching other women in real life and on screen that my strongest attribute was being slightly mysterious and shy but also capable of thoughtful conversation. I did a lot of smiling and giggling when he was trying to be funny (and he was, most of the time). It seemed to work, and it felt great. His interest did not seem to be faltering, even several weeks into our relationship. I’d not been hanging out with Kate nearly as much, as she’d also met someone, and the partying crowd had pretty much all dispersed, as well as the capture-the-flag boys, as it was getting too cold. That meant I could devote my time to English classes, poetry and seeing Graham. There were a few places on campus where we hung out after the coffee shop, and one of them was a parking lot set a little ways from the main campus area, accessed by shuttle. “Lot 20” became a frequent meeting place, and I loved it because it was odd, and he never seemed to acknowledge that. This was one of his most attractive traits; he had some strange behaviors and made strange suggestions for hanging out, mentioned strange topics that may get odd looks, but he never gave a shit in the slightest about what others thought. I remember one day seeing him standing on top of a table in the middle of the quad, students walking all around him, and the look on his face suggested he could easily have just sat down on one of the many benches around to rest. He was present. He was interesting. He knew what he wanted, and right now, that was me. Though I was excited about this new relationship, I had some real demons to discover which had only slightly reared their heads in my past. I’d not had a serious relationship since Andy, and the feelings I’d had for Andy were incredibly self-serving and naïve. The feelings I had for Graham felt much more “adult” and relevant. A lot of what I “knew” about how relationships and love worked had come from fictional stories, and for whatever reasons (probably a mixture of insecurity, loneliness, and fear of losing affection, among other unconscious motivations), I struggled a great deal with jealousy, and still do. I remember feeling extremely hurt whenever Andy tried to mention Melody. There were a few times when Melody came to visit the color guard girls during my senior year, and Andy had seen her. He told me that it was a little emotional for him because “her hair was down and curly” and that’s how she used to wear it sometimes, and he thought it was really pretty. Very soon after, I wrote him a note explaining how much I was hurt by him telling me these things. It was my first real caustic experience with jealousy. I wrote that after he’d told me his thoughts about Melody that day, the words that kept running in my head over and over for the entire next day were “her hair was down and curly, her hair was down and curly, her hair was down and curly.” (I actually wrote this out probably seven times on that piece of paper—you know, just to make sure he got what I was trying to express.) But of course, he didn’t really get it, though he expressed how sorry he was that he’d hurt my feelings and that he didn’t mean it. Of course, he didn’t. I know rationally that there is nothing wrong with seeing an old girlfriend and being reminded of things, whether good or bad. But it was difficult for me to handle because in my mind, he was in love with me, so that’s all that should have existed in his mind. I’m sure there were levels of complexity in the romantic relationships I’d been exposed to, both in real life and on screen, but somehow the belief I’d internalized was that one woman absolutely could be everything one man wanted. There is always this period of obsession after the boy-meets-girl moment, and it usually happens either at the beginning or in the end of a movie. Either way, the movie or TV show doesn’t usually extend too far into the “plateau” of a relationship. There is always something dramatic. Perhaps the man gets into a relationship for the wrong reasons, then he discovers the “real” love of his life through some kind of hardship or trial. The point is, the “true” love that is always conveyed is absolutely blind to all other concerns. My mother and I never had a conversation about what love and relationships really were, but my parents’ own relationship did not deviate from this fantasy I’d formed in terms of perfect love. I’ve never seen my parents fight, not a single time. There has never been any drama whatsoever that I’ve been told about or witnessed. I believed that when you are in love with someone, the feelings that go with it are pretty black and white. This is how I’d always processed my emotions in the past. I was either dedicated to something or I wasn’t. I either liked this person or I did not him. Like a light switch, I could turn off all association with someone, like with Jake. He was in one minute my closest “friend,” and in the next a wholly discarded person I never spoke to again. And there was no emotion or loss involved in most of these light-switch moments. My first true sense of loss and despair happened some time after I’d discarded Andy in the first few months of my freshman year. Shortly after I’d ended our relationship over the phone, he’d hung on, begging to maintain some modicum of friendship, and I said, of course, still relishing the attention that he was unable to completely give up. There was a point, though, after having gone on an overseas class trip to Greece, when he suddenly had the capacity to accept what had happened. I was shocked to my core, and without expecting to feel so deeply, I panicked and told him that I was wrong and that we could work. I remember that night well. We’d driven around for a bit and finally parked in a little hiding place on the side of the road near the park. It had begun raining, but we got out and walked around anyway. No tree cover, just letting the rain fall and drench us. The look on his face had changed. The look in his eyes was different. They were cold and seemed to look right through me. I told him I had been wrong to let him go, but he said he had nothing left in him to give me. He’d been wiped out by what I’d put him through, and I knew it. I asked him, in what I would remember as a very cinematic way as the rain fell, if he thought we could ever get back together. He said he was unsure and kept repeating that he just didn’t “have anything left.” The friendship he’d begged for faded from that night into nothing, but that night, I experienced the first severe emotional pain of my life. He drove me home and I went inside, thankful that my parents weren’t in the living room and that I could quickly sneak into my room and lock the door. I cried into my pillow, sobbing relentlessly. I thought I would never be able to stop. The pain in my chest, the hopelessness. He’d finally been able to let me go. What was wrong with me? What happened to being irresistible? What had I done? I remember the pain so clearly. Graham was different. When I talked with Graham, there was an actual exchange going on that I’d not experienced with Andy. Instead of him listening to me ramble on and on as I tried my best to sound brilliant, he would interject and offer opposing opinions. He was also not shy about pointing out flaws or inconsistencies in my logic or arguments. The nerve! But it felt good. I was starving for satisfying conversation, and I found him as interesting to talk to as I was to him. We would meet after poetry class all the time, at our random meeting places all over campus. We didn’t talk much about anything other than our own lives for a long time, then eventually he invited me to visit him at the house where he lived. At the time, he was sharing a house with a couple of friends in a small Dayton suburb. He gave me the address and I nervously followed my phone’s GPS to get there. The nerves were very high, and I remember hoping that I wouldn’t have to meet anyone that day, though I would probably not be that lucky. Just because I had been willing to challenge my anxiety for him didn’t mean I was ready to do it for other people, even if they were his friends. I pulled up to the house and knew I was in the right place because the garage door was wide open and inside was a small green couch, an ugly, old yellow chair, and a TV. Graham was sitting on the couch. What the hell? I thought. It’s freezing. It’s fucking November. I got out of the car and was quite relieved that I wasn’t going to have to go knock on the door and wait for someone to answer. I walked across the lawn and onto the driveway and Graham stood to meet me halfway. We walked together back to the garage. He had a TV and a video game system hooked up and told me this was where he spent most of his time when he was at home. There was nothing in his voice that suggested he thought this was weird or that he was embarrassed. There never was. A little while later, after we’d been talking and smoking for an hour or so, his friends, who owned the house where he was staying, came home. Their names were Samantha and Ryan. Sam was Graham’s best friend at the time, and this was the first time this dynamic was introduced into our relationship. As we were still in the sugar-coated dating phase, I had no feelings on the relationship between them. I had a task that took all of my energy, though it was becoming more and more clear that I could be myself without fearing he’d run away or think I was strange or awkward. He was an anomaly himself, after all. The first time he came into intimate contact with me, he was standing behind me while I sat on the arm of the couch in the garage. He brought his arms under my arms and wrapped them around me, his head next to mine. A few minutes later, he led me back to his bedroom and we had sex for the first time. Unlike times past, again, this felt like an adult relationship. It wasn’t frivolous, it wasn’t just to pass time. He’d carefully taken his time before “making his move,” and it had been obvious up front that I was old fashioned enough to presume it wasn’t my place to make any of those moves myself. He was fine with this. It also felt different because I didn’t feel so much like I had to play a role. In the past I’d felt, as a woman having sex, my job was to be sexy, cute, make good, sexy noises for him, etc. I didn’t feel that obligation here because the whole situation was light (also, sex with him was actually good, so I didn’t have to just pretend it was for his benefit). We laughed and joked around quite a bit before getting intimate, and afterwards, everything was still comfortable between us. I relaxed my head on his chest and we lay there for a long time, laughing and talking. Very soon after, Graham moved out of Sam and Ryan’s and into another house with some friends. Graham didn’t have much to move, so it happened quickly. When I walked into his new place for the first time, it was late at night, and you could smell the cigarettes and weed from all the way downstairs. I walked in and someone was sitting cross-legged in front of the TV, clearly out of it, the other two were walking around holding bowls of ramen. Graham introduced me, and they all answered as coherently as possible, then we walked back to his bedroom. I’d begun skipping classes when I could to go hang out with Graham. But just as I’d pulled off my freshman and sophomore years of college while partying all the time, I was getting very good grades and never struggled to stay above water (except for one C in biology). We had a set number of absences in each class that we were allowed before it affected our grades, and I took advantage of them. We also worked around his work schedule at the video store, which is where he’d met his new roommates. Our relationship was progressing, and at the same time, nearly all of my former “friendships” had completely fallen by the wayside. I didn’t feel anything in response to this. They were like appointments in an appointment book meant to occupy my time and give me some sort of status on campus. But now that I had Graham, I was content to make him the center of my social endeavors. After all, I was winning with him. We’d never argued about anything, and our conversations were always fun and interesting. He thought we were on the same level intellectually, and he listened to what I had to say, even if it was about people or concepts he knew nothing about. I remember one time he did challenge me on something, and it stuck with me for a long time because it made a lot of sense. He’d heard a statement that he firmly believed in, and the gist is that when you “know” a concept or have an argument for something, the real test is being able to explain it in your own words, and not in borrowed words. A lot of the time I would talk about my fascination with Camus and existentialism or Buddhist philosophy or one of the writers I was reading, and I would use passages from their writings to explain a concept and then just say that I agreed with them. He thought I should be able to explain these concepts in my own words, which I’d never really tried to do before. It made sense to me logically, though it was difficult to translate that into being able to do it, even though I deeply felt these words and ideas. This would be an ongoing challenge between us, and occasionally a point of contention. Sometime later I explained to him, “why do I have to try and put things in my own words if someone else has already done it perfectly? I would just ruin the concept.” I think he begrudgingly said he understood, but I don’t think he completely agreed. I soon realized the depth of his own obsession—video games. His free time, when he wasn’t with me, was spent playing video games on his computer and with “the kids” at the apartment. At the time, Left4Dead was the big game, and they would get very serious about their “strats.” There was a whiteboard involved, and sometimes I would get to play when one of them was taking a break. There was also City of Heroes, which soon disappeared, much to everyone’s dismay. At the same time, I was looking at my courses and calculating that I was on track to finish my degree a little earlier than a full four-year schedule, in March of 2009. Graham also adjusted his classes to be able to finish at the same time. We soon began talking about our future plans after college. He said, without actually proposing, that he would definitely marry me. I told him I didn’t really believe in marriage, but as the weeks passed, I realized that I wanted to be with him and go where he wanted to go. We thought about different places we could move to. I’d always wanted to live on the coast, but after some research it was apparent that California was not going to be affordable. We looked at the East Coast, and Graham shared that he used to go on vacation with some friends down to South Carolina. We looked at Charleston and decided it was a good choice. Very soon after sharing this information with my family, however, I found out from my brother that my parents were distraught at the thought of me living with a man I wasn’t married to. I decided to give in and get married to avoid offending them in such a way, even though I was not a religious person and did not see much sanctity in marriage outside of how it had always been presented to me—as a religious ceremony. But, in the end, it didn’t matter that much. After all, I knew I wanted to be with him, and I was going to get to wear a pretty dress and we would probably receive some cash to help us move. I was not, however, going to give up my name, which was a silly concept to me, and I used a hyphen to adopt both last names. We drove to my hometown for a visit with my parents and to tell them the good news. Wedding preparations would have to be quick, and soon after we would be moving down to Charleston, South Carolina where Graham had a job lined up with Verizon Wireless. We decided to forego the college graduation ceremony, as it seemed to pale in comparison to getting married. Our wedding date was set for May 23, 2009. Marriage Our wedding was held in a park in the middle of Graham’s hometown. The guest list was not long, and the decorations were modest. The ceremony was short, and I think everyone was pretty happy about that because it was extremely hot that day. The reception was also very modest; no alcohol, for my family’s sake. People didn’t really dance. There were some good speeches from Graham’s friends. Graham sang a song for me that was played faster than he was expecting by the band. I didn’t mingle really the whole time. I was relieved as people began to trickle out. I think several older members of my family were put off by the loud band we had hired, which was actually a group of Graham’s college acquaintances. For the honeymoon, Graham and I would be spending a few days at a little lake house about an hour’s drive away. When it was time to go, he picked me up and carried me over his shoulder right out of the building. A few weeks later, we were packing up a U-Haul to drive down to our new apartment in North Charleston, South Carolina. We planned to leave from Graham’s parents’ house. Everyone was sad to see us go, and Sam drove up to the house to say goodbye. We’d had conversations in the past about how close he and Sam were, but the concept was completely foreign to me. As I wrote about earlier, the idea of a man and woman being best friends without wanting more was not something that seemed possible…or believable. It is one thing to be a couple and have other couples as friends. But a married man and married woman hanging out together alone and being really, really close? That was something I was just starting to struggle with, though I’d had so much going on to distract me from it in the weeks leading up to the move that the worst of those feelings had yet to come— and they would hit like a ton of bricks. We arrived at our new apartment and had some time to settle into our new life. But soon, a tidal wave of emotions crashed against our marriage with a relentless force that made our first year together more challenging than either of us had anticipated. PART III: Moving Forward W Chapter 10: The “5%” Theory hen I first began talking to Graham regularly, one of the big things about him that I fell in love with was his seemingly unshakeable confidence in himself and the fact that he knew what he wanted out of life. Most of us don’t really know what we want, and we don’t know that until someone asks us in a straightforward manner. We think we are following the right paths for ourselves, but we millennials were told that we could accomplish whatever we wanted as long as we had a plan and worked hard; it soon became evident to me, however, that another prerequisite was figuring out what the hell I actually wanted out of life. A big part of the “promise” I’d made to myself when I was younger was to retain what was most precious about being a child. I had valued the ability to live presently, to appreciate and look around in wonder and awe at life, and sitting around planning out the rest of one’s life, to me, just seemed like an expedient path toward to death. Of course, there is a balance between the two that is possible. But I don’t think people see how this works until they live a little bit and experience life outside of the one-way track that school and work provides for them. Graham wanted to go to college to find a wife. He told me this. He wanted to someday buy a truck and have a jet-ski. He also wanted to be financially stable. These were his definite goals; nothing more, and nothing less. I remember when he asked me what I wanted out of life, I couldn’t think of a definite answer. A few years before it would have been easy: I wanted to get good enough at Irish dance that I could win in Ireland at the World Championships and then go on to dance in Lord of the Dance and tour the world. When I was a junior and broke my toe at a feis during my slip jig, I ended up in a cast for seven weeks. At the end of the seven weeks, I went back to class and came down on that toe that I’d broken and almost broke it again the same way. I knew then that my competition days were done. I decided I couldn’t progress further, especially as I was only practicing once a week for an hour and trying to take classes full time while all the other competitors were a few years younger and practicing for hours and hours every week. Yes, I was talented and placing consistently even with little practice, but that was never going to be enough to compete at the level I was aiming for. So I was done. And it was not as devastating as it may have been even one year earlier. I had other things on my mind, and other endeavors to focus on. I was good at guitar, and maybe I could be a professional folk singer-songwriter (ignoring my stage fright problem), or maybe I would take my English degree and write a book. But what did I really want out of life? Now? I couldn’t tell him. That’s when he told me about his “5% theory.” Basically, he believed that our relationship had only a 5% chance of working out because I was still very much in the process of becoming who I was going to be. I was still forming, figuring things out. Figuring out what it was I wanted to pursue and what I desired out of life. He was already there, he believed, and he said that a relationship between two people like this could be very difficult. Naturally, being the competitor that I am, I took it as a challenge, and I was not convinced at all that we couldn’t work things out because of this idea. I was excited to go through this process of “becoming” alongside him, with his help. What was wrong with that? He had already shown me so much between the time we met and when we moved into our little apartment in South Carolina. But one of the first, biggest, and longest lasting challenges was about to come to the surface, and it all stemmed from a growing jealousy surrounding Graham’s relationship with Sam. Jealousy As I said before, we were very much wrapped up in each other from the time that we met, and things escalated so quickly that by the time we were actually married, we were still in that new dating phase where we didn’t really see much outside of ourselves (at least, this was my experience). We had been dating only from the beginning of October to around March, which was when we decided to get married. A lot of people date for years, even live together for a while, before deciding they are ready for marriage. This wasn’t an option for me, as I didn’t want to upset my parents. Once the initial romantic phase settled and we had financial and practical challenges to face, all of the stress brought up emotions about my relationship that were very unpleasant. A lot of it had to do with my naivete about what it really means to be in a serious relationship. My convictions were all based on what society and movies and TV told me because I had no experience of it myself. It worked a lot like friendship and camouflaging in social situations. I don’t intuit behavior and belief systems, I adopt them. As outlined before in my previous relationships, I had this concept that when someone tells me he loves me “more than anything,” it means he doesn’t have strong feelings for other people. Turns out, this is not the case. In the words of Andrew Solomon in his book, The Noonday Demon, part of depression is mourning “the absence of perfect love.” This may have meant something slightly different for him, but to me, even though I don’t believe I was clinically depressed yet, I experienced pain whenever I looked over at Graham and saw him crying because he missed his friends, who were mostly female. He told me several times that he loved his friends, but that it was a “different kind of love.” This made sense, of course. I knew I loved my parents and my brother and Graham all in different ways, but it was still uncomfortable and incompatible in my brain to apply this concept to Graham and his female friends, especially Sam, without romantic feelings involved. It became even more difficult as I hounded him for more and more details—and got them. He’d had a crush on so-and-so when they first met, he thought this other friend was “super hot,” he’d gone down on that one once when they were both single in high school, he and this one lived together for a period of time, etc. I couldn’t imagine how he could have once had romantic feelings for these friends, still be maintaining a relationship with them, but not have any residual romantic feelings for them. Because I couldn’t make sense of this in my mind, the pain of jealousy and loneliness would overwhelm me whenever I thought about these women, and the only outlet I had to relieve this pressure was talking to him about it over and over again, trying to dig out more and more reassurance that I was wrong, that he loved me and only me, that he didn’t still have feelings like that for his female friends, etc. This would make me feel slightly better for a short amount of time, then the thoughts would come back and haunt both of us again and again. Many times, random instances of jealousy would trigger all our past painful arguments to the surface. Our marriage intrinsically implied many things in my mind that I’d associated, over time, with being married. If I caught him checking out other women at the beach, it meant he no longer found me that attractive and needed something else to look at. Graham was relentlessly honest and blunt with me. He’d never been like Andy when we were dating, who had showered me with worship and praise and told me I was gorgeous and the most beautiful woman in the world. I was attracted to this honesty on a very deep level, but the surface of my vanity and insecurity had the most direct influence on my emotions. It took time for me to sift through and resolve things emotionally by seeing the truth underneath everything that was hurting. I simply assumed through the course of logic that Graham looking at other women meant he was comparing me with them. This feeling would eat away at me and sometimes even make me feel like a fool for marrying him. Why would I marry someone who wanted other women? I had many, many painful truths to uncover in my future, and I’m still uncovering them today. But at that time, I was going by the ideals I’d learned as a child along with the influence of what marriage and “true love” meant in stories to make decisions about how to feel. According to society, I needed to get upset if my husband was looking at other women or wanted to hang out with other women alone. I needed to be upset if he left the house without his wedding ring or talked on the phone with Sam for hours or kept pictures of himself with his female friends from high school. A woman, as a wife, should be all her husband needs, if the relationship is “correct” and “right.” I’d learned social behavior through mirroring and observation, why should marriage be any different? It was a painful time, but eventually, at the end of each painful, long, torturous fight, I would remind myself that I’d married someone precisely because he went against the grain of so much I’d believed and which had proven to be unreliable and false. I didn’t want a marriage constricted by my keeping him from friends I wasn’t comfortable with, holding him down on a leash whenever we left the house, or obsessing about other women. I made him feel like he had to walk on egg shells around me for fear of upsetting me. I wanted to be stronger than that, but I just wasn’t. When he talked about female coworkers at the call center where he worked, I would wonder if they were pretty and feel a desperate need to ask him if they were. I knew deep down that it was an incredibly insecure thing to ask him, but the pain in my heart wanted to know, as if making it worse was the only way to escape from it. Why did I want to torture myself? Why was I trying to make myself feel so miserable? To catch him saying something that would let me feel ok about being hurt? Was I trying to frame myself as the victim whenever I was upset like this? Probably. If I could make the situation into one in which he was doing something wrong, then my pain could be justified by something other than my blatant insecurity. A lot of times it worked, and a lot of times it just left us both excruciatingly upset. At the height of my paranoia, I’d even gone through his computer and found some porn files and some emails from female friends that I interpreted as flirtatious. The wave of pain in my heart was like injecting a drug into my system. I had somewhere to redirect the pain, at least for a little while. I waited around for him to get home from work and instantly laid into him as soon as he walked through the door. His face contorted and rested in a frown every time I attacked him. He was hurt that I thought it was necessary to go through his computer. He would get so angry at having to go through the motions of the same old arguments that sometimes he’d bang his fist against a piece of furniture or at the wall. Sometimes it was scary, but I knew that if he hit me, I would have an even stronger excuse to keep externalizing the pain of jealousy that kept eating away at me. I find myself sitting here wishing I could hedge a little bit and say that I struggled with several different things, including jealousy, but I know that jealousy was completely central to the pain I inflicted on myself that year. We’d gone out to the beach and I found myself just waiting for him to look at the more attractive women lying on towels beside us or walking down the sidewalk on the other side of the street. We went out to a bowling alley once and met up with a few female coworkers who I instantly judged as more attractive than myself. It didn’t matter that the one was very pregnant and completely appropriate and kind the whole time. I was offended that he thought it was okay to go out and meet up with her, even though he’d brought me along! A similar situation happened when he brought me to a birthday party for one of his younger coworkers. She was a couple of years younger than us, a cute little blonde that I also knew was way more attractive than me. And instead of bending like most men would in that situation and assuring me that I was the most beautiful woman in the whole world, Graham could look me straight in my bloodshot eyes after hours of crying and answer my silly questions honestly, without hesitation. “Do you think she’s prettier than me?” “Yes.” “Is she hotter than me?” “Yep.” Even early on in our relationship, I’d asked him about his previous girlfriend, whom he’d broken up with right after meeting me, wanting to know if she was more attractive than me. Without a second thought, he simply said, “arguably.” I was even blessed with visualizations after being told all the details I wanted to know about their sex life. One time after a heated argument, he bellowed, “and while you’re still throwing salt on the wound, know that she would get dressed up for things sometimes and she looked fucking good, sweetheart.” I learned quickly that I was the least attractive person he’d ever been with. The situation was exacerbated by the fact that he’d quickly grown to hate his job at the call center. He was dealing with angry customers in the collections department, then coming home to a not-so-happy-sometimes-irrationally-angry wife, and I had no sympathy for him if there was something on my mind. All that mattered was my desperate need to lessen the fire eating away at me from the inside. I was jumping from job to job. I went from a magazine editing internship to a Blockbuster video store to ghostwriting in some rich playboy’s house to working in a hospital gift shop all in the same year. We had a couple of visits from my parents as a short break from all this, and I took my mom to the beach where she saw the ocean for the first time in her life. My parents never saw a hint of the drama going on behind the scenes. We were both unhappy. We’d managed to move to a slightly bigger apartment in the same apartment complex by that January, but things between us had not significantly improved. No matter how much he supported his claims that he loved me, that he chose to move hours away and leave all his female friends to be with me and make me happy, I couldn’t see past all of the things I’d learned from other people, from TV, from movies, and the things I imagined people saying to me when I told them my husband didn’t think I was the prettiest woman in the world. Any ugliness associated with a woman’s emotions in a marriage had been hidden from me; I had no blueprint growing up for how the real world worked in regard to marriage, relationships, emotions, or honesty. I was thrown into it headfirst and struggling with wave after wave of discrepancy between the perfect marriage and what was happening in my life. I couldn’t relate to my husband in any way with regard to friendship. I’d never had connections with friends the way that he did, and I was deeply jealous not only of the women in his life, but also of his connection with them as friends. I couldn’t banish the picture of the typical sex-obsessed man from my mind. Jake had admitted as much. He told me he was literally exhausted by how much he needed sex to satisfy him, and I couldn’t imagine other men being different. The files I’d downloaded under “men” in my brain were limited to men like the drunk idiots I’d partied with in college, Jake, and Andy…that was about it. There was the doting boyfriend and the playboy boyfriend. What else was there? Well, I thought I was prepared and excited to learn all about it with Graham, but it was proving to be a long and challenging process. The miracle in all this was that neither of us ever explicitly brought forward divorce as the best option. We made it through that year and decided to move back north, back home, where his brother and some other friends currently lived. We decided to call Charleston an interesting test of our marriage and move on. My emotional issues were in no way solved by that point, and indeed I would continue to suffer from them for years to come, but we did make it through that year still feeling love for one another, as well as the desire to continue working on our marriage. What I’d missed that year was the fact that I’d experienced things that were incongruent regarding what I thought it meant to be “truly in love.” Sometimes at work when I was at the hospital in Charleston, I would see a male nurse walk in and be so incredibly attracted to him that it caught me off guard for several seconds. It was a completely superficial impression made up of what I saw with my eyes, not even a word having been spoken between us. I told my husband about it like it was a science experiment where I was studying the flight path of a comet and he just told me, “that’s human.” That’s it. He wasn’t upset with me, he wasn’t sad. He was accepting. If he’d come home and told me he was incredibly spontaneously sexually attracted to some woman who’d walked by him that day, I would have felt an eruption of pain. But Graham did not seem to have a jealous bone in his body…and I was deeply envious of that as well! It’s one thing to know that what you’re feeling is self-motivated and irrational. But emotion is not something you can reasonably negotiate with. At least, it isn’t for me. Much like a depressive cycle, I have to let the emotion play out, observe it, then let it fade. Talking through it helps somewhat, but I can never instantly disperse it. Much like when Graham gets instantly furious at something small, like someone cutting him off in traffic or being loud outside when he’s trying to sleep, I can’t look at him and tell him there’s no reason to get upset. He has no control over it in that moment, and eventually he’s not mad anymore. I’m sure there is some evolutionary reason for extreme emotion that we’ve managed to fuck up as a society over the centuries, but it is just so easy for my emotions to go haywire and mess up every calibration I thought I had in place. Autistic Women and Emotion Many people have this notion that people with autism lack emotion and empathy. Well, I’m sure there are lots of autistic people who are very lacking in one or both of these areas. But, as they say, if you’ve met one person with autism…you’ve met one person with autism. And what’s more, a lot of the stereotypes are built from experience with boys’ symptoms and assuming that all this applies the same way with women. The fact is, there is not nearly as much research available on women with autism and their symptoms compared to boys (though this is changing) and a lot of this has to do with the fact that many women are not diagnosed at a young age, like young boys, because their symptoms are hidden by the female’s capacity for masking, or camouflaging, in social situations. It’s just beginning to come to light in recent years that many women who have gone through their lives without diagnoses are suddenly becoming aware of autism and Asperger’s through information on the internet and social media. Now there are tests you can take that can clue you in on autism and its symptoms (though these tests are variable and should not be taken as definitive diagnoses). After years of research, I can tell you that a whole lot of women have felt obliged to shatter this notion of zero emotional capacity in autistic women, as many autistic women indeed feel that their capacity for emotion is actually exceptional and much more intense than many neurotypicals’. Many people mix up emotion and empathy, but empathy is not outside of the autistic woman’s realm, either. Many women experience empathy with others to the extent that they practice avoidance when it comes to sad movies or contact with people in bad circumstances because of the profound and long-lasting emotional effects those experiences can have on them. Back Home Graham and I found an apartment in a suburb of Columbus called Reynoldsburg. His brother lived nearby, as well as some old friends. I would continue working at odd jobs with little growth opportunity, hoping to land some kind of editing gig in the city. I knew I wanted to do something fun, like editing books, but I had no idea how I would be able to make that a reality. For the time being, it was coffee shop after coffee shop. We continued to grow in our marriage and come up against challenges, but it was nothing like what we’d been through in Charleston. We had a long way to go in terms of learning how to fight efficiently and with damage control. We were still running away with our emotions whenever an argument came up and slinging names and bringing up every other past infraction we could think of to support why we were right in this instance. The worst part was that if Graham got really upset, the way he needed to deal with that was to shut down and go to sleep and address it later. This is not something I could handle. If something was ripping my heart apart from the inside it had to be addressed now, or…well, I wasn’t sure what would happen. I would do everything in my power to keep him with me until the issue was resolved. The night I did learn what would happen occurred sometime into that second year of marriage in our new apartment. We’d been arguing intensely about something and he had insisted on going to bed. This time I couldn’t change his mind, no matter what I said, and when I realized I couldn’t keep him with me as I worked through what I was feeling, I broke down. This is what’s referred to in the autism community as a “meltdown.” It was one of the worst experiences I’ve ever had in my life. I struggled to breathe, I felt like I couldn’t stop moving, like every part of my body was trying to do something but it didn’t know what or how it was supposed to do it. The crying intensified to sobbing that I couldn’t control. Graham heard me and immediately came out to help me calm down. I was cowering in the corner of the bathroom, confused, scared, unsure of what was happening or how I was going to stop it. Graham crouched down with me and told me to breathe. I concentrated on controlling my breath after realizing I was hyperventilating. I couldn’t get out many coherent words, but somehow I managed to get out that we couldn’t end things that way. After calming down, I did not press him to talk all night, but by the end of what resolution we could muster, he’d learned something very important about how I could and could not process emotion. There was no putting things aside until the next morning. There is similarity here to how I experience an obsessive cycle, when there is no taking a break from researching this or that topic or writing that song or practicing that piano part until I’ve completely exhausted the dictate of that impulse. But because I did not have the information I do now about autism, I was simply furthering this idea that I was a very emotionally weak person who was insecure, shy, introverted, socially anxious, etc. The worst fate I could imagine was turning into all the things I “knew” men hated: a naggy and emotionally exhausting wife who is not self-sufficient. I hated the idea of being “needy,” and I hated it when I saw this in myself. But I couldn’t just switch off my needs, and I didn’t have friends to unburden myself to. Not that there weren’t people around who considered me a friend and would be more than willing to listen to me. But no matter how badly someone wants to realize a connection with someone who is autistic, there are always going to be certain boundaries. Sometimes they can be breached and sometimes it takes a lot of work over the course of years. There was another character trait that fit right along with the others in my list under “most despicable type of wife”—being high-maintenance, someone who needs to be told constantly that she is loved, who needs constant reassurance that a relationship is right, strong, etc. It would take me years to figure it out, but the fact is that I am inescapably high-maintenance. Additionally, this high-maintenance aspect is a product of my autism, not a character flaw, and certainly not something to be ashamed of. This constant need for reassurance stems from the fact that I do not feel people or the connection inherent in friendship and loving relationships to the extent that neurotypicals do. For example, I need Graham to tell me he loves me today because I have no evidence or reason to believe he loves me today even if he told me he loved me yesterday and the day before. (This is kind of an extreme example, but you get the idea.) Similarly, in friendship, I am constantly mesmerized when I hear someone in our circle say something less than flattering about another in the group, but it seems to have no bearing on the state of their friendship. In my mind, it seems logical that once you find a flaw in someone, their value goes down in terms of the relevancy and impact they have on your life. This does not seem to be the case, and thankfully so! A world in which friendship only exists where there is no space for being human would be a very cold place, even if it seems logical (channeling Spock here). Real friends understand that everyone makes mistakes sometimes. Though I admit that I struggle with this “unconditional” idea of friendship. There are certainly circumstances in which friendship can and should be lost, such as serious betrayal or wrongdoing. But the petty and transitory complaints for minor infractions, these things are easily forgotten in our circle. The next time everyone gets together, everything seems to be forgotten. I suppose it’s possible that they are hiding their true feelings from the others, but though I feel I’ve developed into something of a master in this regard, I have absolutely no skill when it comes to pegging others in the midst of masking. It’s one of those most dangerous and harmful inadequacies that have plagued my life from the time I first began recognizing people’s manipulative sides in high school and college. I tend toward trust and gullibility, and I am an easy target for making jokes and teasing in a way that I don’t recognize I was being teased until hours or days or even weeks later. It is a paralyzingly embarrassing realization, and one of the most emotionally painful experiences. O Chapter 11: Sonmi 451 nce settled in our new apartment surrounded by friends and family, I began working as a barista in a Starbucks coffee shop located in a mall on the northwest side of town. The commute to work was about a 25-minute drive. This was my first coffee shop experience (with many to follow), and I have to say it was a bit staggering in a few important ways. It was the first time I’d put on an apron for a job. When I pulled that green thing over my head and tied the string behind my back, I felt a wave of emotion tied to feelings of subservience. Up until this point I’d worked in plenty of retail positions, but there was something different about food service. It felt like I’d descended to a very low rung on the professional ladder, and I remember pointedly the first time I began sweeping up the dining area in my green apron after a few days on the job. It wasn’t a clear emotion or sensation, but an amalgamation of many sensations, including low self-esteem, embarrassment, unattractiveness, old. These connections would have been drawn from my own experiences with the world and with food service. There were two kinds of acceptable people who could work food service, the rest were pathetic. If I was quite young and working for the first time, a barista position made sense. If I was older and looking for a little part-time work after having retired from a long and prosperous career, wanting to keep a connection with people, this was also acceptable. But for me, a mid-twenties college graduate, it felt like a hole I would not be able to escape from. And it wasn’t because I hated the work I did. I quite enjoyed it a lot of the time. It was simply a matter of confronting the paradigm I’d been brought up with versus the real world, similar to the ideal marriage discrepancies. I survived Starbucks for several months, making just enough money to pay bills that included sizable student loan payments each month from both my husband’s and my end. Eventually I found another position as a barista at a different coffee shop, this one inside of a Nordstrom store in one of the fancier malls. This drive was a little easier, but the job presented a whole different set of challenges and life lessons. The clientele who frequented Nordstrom tended to be attractive, wealthy, and very self-entitled. They expected the best service because they were paying for it. Obviously, not every person who walked in to order a coffee was a snob, but these weren’t the people who stood out, as I tend to remember the worst in people over the best. On top of this, I worked with a young man who thought he was God’s gift to women. He would make lewd comments about attractive women who came and went. He was never concerned with hiding his feelings, either, as if everyone should hear and be interested. He embodied a set of male characteristics that I was familiar with, and I handled being around him to the best of my ability. This was also the first time where there were days when I was expected to work alone for a few hours in the morning. I soon had to discuss a different schedule with the shop manager, Allie, because I would have abrupt and urgent episodes where I felt I needed to leave and go to the bathroom. At the time, it seemed to me like a legitimate physical complaint that I needed to see a doctor about. Allie said that was okay and she volunteered to come in herself or asked someone else to come in to be with me during those mornings when we really only needed one person working. Whatever everyone thought about this, they kept it very quiet. I was especially thankful for Allie’s understanding. I think she could tell how embarrassed I was, being unable to handle solo shifts at my age. But she was quick to come up with a plan to deal with it. A few days later I made an appointment with a urologist downtown to address this “urgency” issue. I’d done some research online and come up with something called overactive bladder that seemed to fit my symptoms. I described what I was going through to the doctor, and he said that he would like me to have several tests done to make sure nothing major was occurring. I found out shortly after how much these tests were going to cost and quickly decided they weren’t going to happen. I cut down on coffee drinking, and this, coupled with no more solo shifts, seemed to alleviate the problem. What I figured out over years of experience with anxiety is that this urgency problem is directly related to acute anxiety, and as soon as the anxiety-stimulating conditions are relieved, the urgency goes away. I’d experienced mild forms of this throughout my years performing and competing on stages, and it isn’t uncommon. Many people testify to the strong feeling of needing to pee right before going on stage, but as soon as they are on stage, the feeling disappears, and they are able to blame it all on “nerves.” My experience was similar, though it felt very intense and scary for me. This was the first time I’d been challenged in this way, and my anxiety was kicking into high gear. My thoughts would focus on all the terrible things that could happen and the ways in which I could totally screw up at my job. This exacerbated the cycle of negative thoughts until it was out of control and I suddenly had an urgent need to remove myself from the environment, almost like a panic attack. The easiest way to be excused has always been to say you need to use the restroom, so perhaps my body was utilizing this piece of social knowledge to create an escape route. In any case, I was able to make small changes to my habits, and the feelings lessened as I got more experience on the job, though they would never fully disappear. The more I reflect, the more I realize that a lot of the anxiety had to do with the kinds of people who usually came in, either from inside the store or as shoppers at the mall. They all seemed to exude an aura of self-righteousness, and this made my anxiety even worse. I felt like a servant now more than ever; at least the people I was serving at Starbucks in the mall felt like equals. I knew in my logical mind that this was all bullshit building up in my mind, but as we’ve discussed, emotion, and especially social anxiety, is rarely logical. Graham was happy with his new position within Verizon Wireless where he was a salesman in a store and no longer handling angry callers in a call center. After less than a year, I was ready to move on to yet another coffee shop gig, though I believed this one would be a bit different. First of all, it was a coffee shop inside a hospital with much more normal hours— Monday through Friday and no weekends. It also paid a lot better than the just above minimum wage I was getting at Nordstrom. I interviewed and was offered the job, though it took almost a month for all the paperwork, tests and background checks to clear. I had to get several shots according to hospital rules, but eventually, I began working. I didn’t have to wear an apron or any kind of silly uniform here. The only requirement was black or khaki work pants and a collared shirt. This little shop only employed four people, who shared the workload of a coffee shop that was open Monday through Friday from 5 am to 9 pm. At first, I worked alongside another coworker for my shifts, but eventually I was asked to work solo shifts, after the youngest employee in the group left to return to full-time college classes. I soon found myself opening and/or closing the shop on my own, counting down drawers, stocking, etc. Sometimes I would even have to handle a line of customers that stretched out the door on my own. At this point, I knew my way around an espresso machine and could juggle the tasks of making drinks and ringing people out quite efficiently. I became proud of my ability to multitask on this level without freaking out, and my secret weapon was a little something called Sonmi 451. Sonmi 451 is an AI character from a brilliant book called Cloud Atlas, written by David Mitchell. It had such a powerful effect on me, I wrote extensively on the book in my journal. I wrote a great deal about how I felt like Sonmi 451 from the book at my coffee shop jobs. I didn’t care for the customers, so I had to adopt a consistent persona that would not be relieved until after my shift was complete. I developed a very methodical routine for each person I had to deal with, though some of them presented challenges. I also wrote about how I felt offended that I was expected to offer such valuable gestures as respect and kindness in exchange for something “as ethereal as cash” just because they were the “almighty customer.” I understood money made the world go ‘round, but what was I being asked to sacrifice in the name of this bullshit ethic? (Very new-age millennial, I know.) It is necessary to note that in the midst of this decidedly negative journal entry, there are occasional experiences with customers that instantly break the boundaries of my method. These are the awesomely positive or incredibly kind people who dare to look me in the eyes, (Oh wow! They have eyes just like me!) or smile when I smile at them, or make a genuine comment that isn't mindless or held together by bullshit. These are truly magical moments, as rare as unicorns, when I may even venture so far as to ask how their day is going because I actually want to know. This, my friends, is kindness for kindness, respect for respect, freely given and outside the paradigm. I know I could never manage a career in retail because I don't believe anyone's money is worth my respect. But I also don't think people realize how easy it is to earn mutual respect, even in the menial task of buying a coffee. All it takes is the acknowledgement that it's not just the machine making you that coffee. I've become very conscious of the fact that the way I behave at work is very different from the way I behave at home. I think a lot of people would sympathize with this. My husband sometimes apologizes for being distant when he comes home because he's spent all of his energy being friendly and outgoing at work. I think it was Sartre or another existentialist writer who wrote about embodying the "role" of one's profession, whether as a waiter or salesperson or whatever, to the point where their identity is fused with that role. A man is no longer a man with a family and nice house, but a corporate CEO with a family and nice house. I felt this kind of identity crisis at the coffee shop. Sometimes it was as if the actions or words I would say normally were not even in the pool of options for me while working. Perhaps I could make a genuine connection with this or that person if I'd met them somewhere else, at a concert or something, but it is impossible for this to happen in my work setting because of the customer/service person relationship. It is, of course, possible to break those rules, but I've had very few experiences with people who were willing to do this, or to essentially go that far. After working in retail for a few years, I began to feel the desire to switch to autopilot in order to deal with people because I was resigned to the fact that nearly all my interactions with people were inauthentic. As I’ve discussed at length in this book, I have difficulty maintaining the feeling of connection with people who have been in my life for decades, let alone some stranger who comes in for coffee and is never seen again. Nevertheless, many people expect to be warmly and genuinely interacted with in a retail environment, and I’ve known many coworkers who have this talent. I do not have this capacity, and it was fascinating for me to observe myself turning into this artificially warm barista for the duration of my shifts. Eventually, I came to realize I was not satisfied with the work I was doing and wanted to find another job that would give me some sense of purpose. I didn’t want to just be a robot all day; I had a genuine desire to help people, and I was pretty sure I was capable of it even in strenuous settings. After all, if I could handle the coffee shop on my own, with lines of people out the door and a million things to do in the morning and at closing, then I could do anything. But the missing factor here was coworkers. I came to realize later that my success in this position had a lot to do with the fact that I worked alone. I was in control, and I’d memorized structured tasks that I had learned to execute as well as anyone could. It was around this time when I found the ad on Craigslist for an aide at Anderson Learning Center; the position which would eventually lead to so much self-discovery and revelation, as well as a diagnosis of Asperger’s Syndrome. F Chapter 12: The Solo Journey ollowing Anderson, therapy, learning about autism and a diagnosis, I found myself working as a maid for a company in town called Magic Maids. My year and a half employment with them proved to be my favorite job of anything I’d done for work thus far in my life, though I’d been much more deeply affected by my diagnosis of Asperger’s then I’d thought at the time. In retrospect, I recognize the symptoms of depression, as well as a general feeling of being lost. There was a feeling of relief but also a struggle with figuring out who I was and wondering if I would forever define myself through the lens of autism. Behaviors and feelings I’d previously assigned to just being shy and introverted I now understood more clearly. Magic Maids was comfortable because I got to work alone a lot, and interacting with clients made me nervous. I loved doing something physical each day and escaping the monotony of being in an office where everything is nearly the same every single day. I also felt pride in being able to handle the variance in daily tasks, going from house to house and conquering different spaces that were previously unknown to me. This was a level of challenge that I appreciated and was not usually overwhelmed by. I was thankful for my time at Magic Maids, and I think it was a good place to be while I juggled all the things in my head that I needed to sort out. Cleaning houses was something I could go to work and do then completely leave once my work was done. There was no going home and worrying about the next day, unlike my previous job. I did some strange things during this time, including nearly shaving my head completely bald. I remember the strange impulse, standing there in the bathroom, looking at myself in the mirror. What control had I had in my life up to this point, and how much of it had been dictated by autism? I felt numb for many months after stopping therapy. I’d gone in one day and told my therapist that I believed I’d gotten all I could out of speaking with her, and she congratulated me. I’d learned the source of my anxiety, and I now had tools to use to get through uncomfortable situations. Now it was all up to me to decide how to continue living my life with this new identity. The only thing I asked the psychologist for after she told me I was “on the right track” in my suspicion of Asperger’s was help with connecting to a group of other Aspies I could talk to. She gave me the name of only one group she knew of, but after going home and looking them up, I found that they had been inactive for quite some time. From there I looked at sites like MeetUp to see if there was some kind of local adult Asperger’s club. I didn’t find anything at the time, and I would continue looking for years in search of a group—my group, my tribe. I looked at lots of different groups associated with the things I enjoyed, like dancing and electronic music. One of the most intriguing was Moon Tribe, which gathered in deserts and on beaches across the West Coast to dance to DJs’ music all night long. I thought it was a beautiful idea and connected deeply with the meditative dance that was core to their fellowship. I’d also watched a documentary about something called the Electric Daisy Carnival. When I found this particular documentary, it became a quick obsession. The way they presented and set up the festival called to something in me, and I believed that if I just went there, maybe finally I would find people with whom everything clicked, and I would finally find my tribe of like-minded people. The tickets were quite expensive, but Graham decided that if I saved up for a year to go to the next festival in June of 2016, we could make it work. I’d been recording music for years and had recently purchased the latest Ableton Live software for PC. I owned a couple of mics and an audio interface, as well as a decent keyboard. Nothing in my life brought me more satisfaction, happiness and pride than creating a new track and playing back over and over again after publishing on Soundcloud. I couldn’t (and still don’t) understand how anyone could live a life without the impulse to create in some way. Back at Anderson, I’d been introduced to trance and Simon O’Shine by Cameron and then had quickly fallen in love with trance music. This was kind of a gateway into all the electronic sounds I would continue to discover and fall in love with, beginning with industrial and into dark ambient, experimental, progressive... The space that had been predominantly filled with Enigma and Tangerine Dream began to grow into an enormous space of obsession with sounds from all over the world and from every decade going back to the 60s. I tried to structure my discovery and learning similarly to the way I tried to organize my film watching. I wanted to go back and hear music from the most important eras of evolution in electronic music and found fascinating documentaries on the likes of Kraftwerk, watching them religiously. I watched documentaries about early hip hop, rap, disco, Motown, Europop. I fell in love with the songs “Vienna” from Ultravox and “Sweet Dreams” by Eurythmics. My whole idea of structuring my discovery fell apart quickly. I began to dive into different genres and wandered in and out of electronic and ambient to industrial rock, falling hard for the band Rammstein from Germany. Then I would stumble on other artists and listen to nothing but them for weeks, like Solar Fake. Somewhere in there I discovered Bjork, thanks mostly to a couple of friends and their enthusiasm for her music. I don’t want to get too lost going down this rabbit hole, but suffice it to say I was discovering a whole lot of music and was concentrating primarily on producing experimental electronic music. During my EDC obsession year, I was mostly focused on absorbing all the trance music I could. I joined a Facebook group for people planning to go to next summer’s EDC and befriended many people who seemed to be open to anyone. They were all so friendly, and I imagined an environment where I could just go and be and dance and connect with people that way instead of relying on conversations. EDC is one of the biggest annual music festivals in the world for electronic music. There are several stages elaborately set up with billions of lights and effects. Different genres play at different stages, and the festival lasts for three days. In the documentary, people looked so happy and elated just to be there. I was instantly wrapped up in the visuals presented in the film. I had caught the fever. I spent hours that year coming up with costume ideas and making “candy” out of beads, which were meant to be shared with other people at the festival. I learned how to make candy cuffs and make cute designs with the different colors of beads. I even made a mask out of beads. The excitement for EDC kept me occupied for probably five months before the actual event. I was constantly listening to new electronic music from the artists that were scheduled to be there and making bead things and putting together costumes and planning meetups with people… It was a constant excitement and worked beautifully to ward off much of the anxiety and depressive cycles that I had experienced the year before during the winter months. EDC, in my mind, grew to symbolize so much more than a festival. I’d begun to wrap up my hopes and dreams in the possibility of discovering more than just music. I dreamed of meeting myself in others and creating lasting friendships of a kind I’d never felt before. The naivete of my childhood was back in full force and would, I soon realized, always be with me. And I don’t regret this one bit. To be able to experience life with the enthusiasm and excitement of a child is something I wouldn’t trade for the world, even if that enthusiasm is sometimes met with disappointment. My anxiety and nerves were out of control the day before flying out to Vegas. I’d received a box in the mail with my ticket and some cool little goodies, including a sticker that I put on my suitcase to help me find it in baggage claim later. I knew the best way to handle things like this was to concentrate on one thing at a time. This would help keep me from getting overwhelmed. Graham dropped me off at the airport, and I went through the motions of security and waiting to board the plane. I remember flying over the desert for the first time in my life. I had never been west past St. Louis, so this was quite an adventure for me. The gorgeous red earth looked as foreign as Mars to me, and I must have looked like a little kid with the giant grin on my face. I had a layover in Denver and was again in awe of the view of the incredible snow-topped mountains. As with any trip I go on, every detail had been meticulously planned for months. I had transfers by shared shuttle reserved for each trip to and from the airport, and I had a map of the hotel to help me find where I was supposed to check in for the transfer to EDC and get my ride ticket. I am always early to anything, the extent of which is commensurate with how much anxiety the event is conjuring in my gut. Therefore, on day 1 of EDC, I was so early that there was no line to get my shuttle ride ticket! I went to walk around and get something to eat before getting ready to dress for day 1 of this epic music festival I’d been waiting for, for months. I’d agreed to join a group of people at a restaurant for breakfast the following morning on the EDC Facebook group. And now that the weekend was here, I was feeling the effects of anxiety and discomfort creeping up on me. Had I taken on too much? I just kept breathing and telling myself, “one thing at a time, one thing at a time.” I got in line a few hours later to get on the shuttle to EDC. There were several lines forming for different shuttles, and hundreds of people lined across huge parking lots and in winding, roped off areas inside the parking garage of the hotel Linq. I waited approximately an hour to get on the bus, and then the real waiting began. I had not anticipated how much waiting was in store for me. The traffic to get into the EDC grounds was so bad that I sat on this bus in stopped traffic for hours before getting into actual festival. I think the trip that ordinarily would have taken about 20 minutes took somewhere in the ballpark of 2 and a half hours. This killed a whole lot of enthusiasm and excitement I’d worked hard to keep above the level of anxiety I was feeling. When we eventually parked and were let off, it was almost 11 at night, and the event had been going on for several hours. I walked the long dirt road along with hundreds of other people unloading from shuttles to the gates. There was an area outside the gates that was elevated where I had an awesome view of the festival and many of the stages, brightly lit with thousands of lights and lasers coming from every direction. Soon after, I was there. I was inside. I walked for a bit towards the main action and was hit by the bass of a nearby stage. I immediately started to feel nauseated and spotted a booth where they were making smoothies. I was starting to feel really self-conscious about being alone. No one else was by themselves, or so it seemed to me at the time. I felt people looking at me. At one point some guy who did not speak English came up to me, saying nothing, then just stopped and stared at me. He didn’t move, he just stood there grinning at me. I began to move away after smiling and nodding, but he followed me to a drinking fountain where there were little paper cups. I filled one and took a few sips while this guy kept staring at me. He seemed to be inviting me to come with him somewhere. He gestured with his hand to follow him, and I shook my head and said, “no thank you.” I’m not sure if he understood me or not, but I walked away and did not look back. I wandered around a bit, pretending like maybe I was looking for someone as my self-consciousness rose. I was also experiencing sensory issues I was not ready for. As I would get near to a stage, my heart would start pounding and I felt dizzy. The nerves and anxiety I was feeling coupled with the sensory overload was too much, and I quickly realized this wasn’t going to be what I’d imagined it would be. I felt like I might have been able to handle it had I been with one other person. But all of the camaraderie and fellowship that I’d imagined was simply all in my head, and everyone was squarely in their own worlds within their own groups. Yes, I could have gone off with creepy guy…but you all know now about my anxiety around men in general, let alone a strange one who stares and doesn’t speak English. I found an open spot on the ground and sat down, staring at my phone, trying to look like I was meeting people and just waiting for them. I felt my aloneness more and more as the minutes passed, and I looked at the clock on my phone to see how long I was going to have to wait before the shuttles started taking people back to their hotels. I had half an hour. I decided to lay down but was promptly accosted by staff whose job was solely to go around and look for people who might be overdosing on drugs. I assured them I was fine and told them that I was just a little overwhelmed. I think I actually told them about being autistic and flying across the country alone to come here. They were definitely impressed and offered to take me to one of the tents meant for people who needed a break and to cool off. There were fans and water there. I said thanks and accepted the offer. They also handed me a pair of earplugs to use. I felt self-conscious walking with staff to this tent, but at this point my nerves were such a wreck I was almost numb. There were people on stilts lit up like Christmas trees walking all around. Music blared from every direction, and I wanted nothing more than to go join all these happy people. It was like being behind a gate to something I wanted, and all I needed was someone to join me to walk through it. I couldn’t just walk up on my own, I physically couldn’t do it. Perhaps with someone beside me, and the help of the earplugs, the experience would have been much different, but I’ll never know. We stopped at the tent, and I thanked the staffers for their kindness, then they left. I sat down one more time. Some random drunk girl came over and gave me a big hug and some candy. Then I looked at my phone again to check the time. I figured if I started walking towards the shuttle now, I would make it back just in time for the first trip back to Vegas, so I did. I was not the only one there waiting on the first shuttle. There were a couple of other kids, one of them looked quite traumatized. I overheard a conversation with one of the shuttle drivers. He’d witnessed someone overdosing right in front of a stage. He’d been carried out right in front of his eyes and he was so messed up about this that he came straight back to the shuttles. I’m not sure if he actually witnessed someone dying, as EDC managers reported zero fatalities that year after the fact, but I’m sure he saw someone who was quite fucked up. At any rate, I was glad to be back on the shuttle for the much quicker ride back to the hotels. There were maybe eight of us total going back of the thousands who had made the journey to the EDC grounds just a few hours before. As soon as I got back to the hotel, I got on Facebook and posted to the EDC group that I had a ticket for the following two days of EDC along with a shuttle pass. I would sell them for $200. I got a response almost immediately and met up with a couple the following morning near my hotel. The woman thanked me and slipped the wristband easily onto her wrist and we went our separate ways. I had two days left in Vegas, so I looked up shows in the area and quickly decided I wanted to see a Cirque du Soleil show, maybe two. I walked to the Bellagio and into the hotel after watching the fountains. I found the theater front desk and asked for the best seat available for their 7 pm show. After that, I reserved a ticket to Ka the following night. The rest of the time I spent walking around on the strip, doing some shopping, and plenty of eating. I enjoyed my time in Vegas immensely, though it turned out to be a much different trip than I’d planned. A part of me felt silly for having spent so much time gearing up for an experience that ended up not being something I could handle, at least on my own. I keep wondering if the sensory overload was the final straw, or if it was the intense anxiety from being alone there. All I know is that the combination of both was unbearable. But ultimately, I am quite proud that I took the leap and went. I continue to explore and take risks and do things that make me uncomfortable to challenge myself. It wasn’t a failure, it was an experience that I am still grateful for. I will continue to do weird, impulsive, crazy things because I want to prove to myself that I can and get answers to questions about myself. I keep looking, and I will never stop looking. As I discover and learn from people and experiences out there, I also discover things about myself that I would never have learned cooped up at home. I know that doing things to challenge my anxiety results in pride in my abilities and daring nature when it comes to scary things. Traveling solo is something I’m determined to conquer on a larger and larger scale. Eventually I will go overseas and travel in Europe solo to see things I’ve wanted to see for decades. My first obsession, Ireland, waits for me to see her one day. The solo journey for me is about more than traveling solo, however. As I’ve discussed in previous chapters, every facet of life is in a sense a solo journey in terms of my relationships with other people. I experience love and friendship, but also a severing of ties with that connection when their physical presence is gone. I easily slip into my own world once I am alone, and there are significant consequences to this lack of feeling people around me. Social anxiety has been a lifelong struggle, but learning about depression was a different ballgame, and I wasn’t totally prepared for it. I would need to develop whole new strategies to deal with this new challenge. O Chapter 13: Anxiety and Depression ne of the clearest triggers for my depression is loneliness. The feeling sneaks up on me at random times, just like a depressive cycle, but may only last for a few hours. During this time, I essentially mourn my nature as a solitary being without the capacity to meaningfully feel other people. My husband is the closest thing I have to the tie of connection other than my brother, and even with Graham, I find that I can deal with being apart from him very well—much better than other spouses seem to handle it. I cry, sometimes very hard, thinking of how much I wish I could just pick up my phone and call someone and talk to them about these very difficult things. You may think that all I have to do is get up the nerve to do it. But the sadness doesn’t come from my inability to dial a phone number. It comes from my knowing that this experience, for me, would be empty. I don’t talk to my friends or my parents when I’m going through something hard because the act is as empty as giving hugs for me. I don’t feel the warmth in a hug or a handshake. The warmth in a relationship, like the one I have with my husband, emanates primarily from my brain, a conscious and thinking thing, not a feeling thing. I feel happiness and satisfaction in quiet moments just being with him, sitting with my head on his shoulder, or lying beside him, but it takes a degree of mental effort and is not automatic. This doesn’t mean I love him less than other people love their spouses. It just means my experience of love and affection is different from other people’s experiences, and definitely different from neurotypicals’. Over time I’ve recognized a stronger bond with my husband that goes further than anything I thought was possible. I just didn’t have a blueprint for it that I recognized. There aren’t a lot of traits about myself that I would feel comfortable universalizing across the autism spectrum, but I do feel that you can be confident in one aspect when it comes to having a relationship with someone who is autistic. You can rest assured that if an autistic person maintains and puts effort into a relationship with you, it is because you have consistently shown that you are someone who adds something positive to that person’s life. We don’t just love people because they say they are our friends or because they are family. Someone can be my friend last week or last year, but to remain someone I consider a friend and someone who stays in my heart that way is to exude that value on a consistent basis. It goes back to my “high-maintenance” nature. Just because I know you valued me as a friend yesterday doesn’t mean I know it today, and I constantly feel I need to be proving this status and also expect the same from others. That’s why I would say that a relationship with someone on the spectrum is incredibly meaningful and never frivolous; never resting on laurels, shall we say. I would say loneliness is the most direct consequence that I can link with the nature of being autistic and seems to be one of the most common ailments in the community for both similar and very different reasons from those I’ve mentioned. I am incredibly fortunate in my place on the spectrum. There are plenty of people with autism who do not have the ability to fit in as well as I do and are far from it. And for those of you with direct experience with autism, I don’t need to lecture you on how difficult this can be. And I won’t pretend to be an expert on the condition outside of my own personal experience and my brief stay at Anderson. However, I do feel compelled to speak from the point of view of those of us who are living and struggling behind expertly-crafted masks, dealing with the conflict between authenticity and acceptance in society. Not adequately reconciling these conflicting experiences can lead quickly to depression, which comes in many forms. The treatment for severe depression varies from no treatment at all to being overtreated with an unsafe mix of drugs in the worst-case scenarios. Many people struggle for months or years trying to get the drug combination right for their unique bodies. And that is what is so difficult when it comes to depression, and also when it comes to explaining an individual’s depression when compared to others: A lot like autism, it is a struggle unique to each individual. I’ve experienced a range of depression manifestations myself, though I’ve never been on an antidepressant long-term. One book that has recently opened my eyes to a wealth of insight regarding depression is The Noonday Demon by Andrew Solomon. In his book, Mr. Solomon goes through in detail his personal experience with depression and depression treatments, as well as his research and experience following other victims’ testimonies. Because you can’t nail down depression according to a perfect set of consistent symptoms across the board for each person, there is a marked stigma in society, as well as a gross misunderstanding, when it comes to the knowledge of what exactly depression is. The fact that it is a very real mental illness as physically present as a broken arm is foreign to many people who maintain that depression is just feeling really sad and that people just need to “think positively” to get better. There is really nothing more infuriating than this comment for someone struggling with depression. Depression is always a personal journey and struggle. You may have help along the way through the support of people who love you or a good doctor and/or therapist, but in the end, it is a personal journey. My personal triggers manifest seemingly out of thin air, but when the obsessive thoughts begin, I know they are rooted in a deep insecurity regarding my appearance and its insidious connection to my value as a woman, as well as in my relationship. I’ve personally worked out a few things over the years that help me cope with my particular level and degree of depression, which, as I’ve stated, comes in waves throughout the year. First of all, I learned to recognize my depression when it is manifesting. I usually wake up with feelings that were not present the day before and acknowledge that. My depression ranges from an overbearing sensation of fatigue accompanied by complete lack of motivation to do anything, to a days-long barrage of obsessively negative thoughts playing on repeat in my mind. What I’ve observed in recent years, and which I consider kind of fascinating, is that my anxiety and depression can often work to offset one another if I can play it correctly. You see, depression is an idle affliction. I physically sink into depression in the absence of adequate distractions. Whereas anxiety is a reaction to outside stimuli, of which I have some control over. I can counter depression to some degree by challenging my social anxiety. Most recently, I’ve been accomplishing this by committing myself to a weekly dance class and MeetUp focused on an activity I enjoy —the game of Go. When my brain is distracted by being overcome by anxiety, the depression dissipates. My reward is that if I successfully conquer the quest of the evening—by which I mean simply having gotten in my car, driven to the meeting or class, survived, then driven home—I feel the pride of having conquered it. This is huge, as anyone on the spectrum or who struggles with anxiety and depression will tell you. Other coping mechanisms include keeping in mind that the cycles are always temporary and getting physical exercise. Sometimes, though, I am overcome and must endure. The key for me is to simply accept this and wait it out, asking for some support from my husband if I need it. Many women I’ve talked to who were diagnosed with ASD as an adult have been affected by the comorbid conditions of anxiety and depression. The symptoms of these disorders mix and mingle with the behaviors characteristic of autism. It can be tricky to weed out and sort what symptoms started when and where the causality lies. It’s taken years of self-reflection, therapy and research to come to some semblance of understanding of my own conditions. I know from being on Prozac to treat my social anxiety that my social “blind spots” are a part of me independently of anxiety or depression. Though the social aspects of autism are just a part of the status, they are definitely the most obvious characteristics that are both observable and recognizable. The anxiety stems from what I perceive as failures as a result of seeing others succeed at things that should be simple but are not for me. Things like developing working relationships with coworkers, greeting people when I walk into their homes or when they walk into mine, and handling goodbyes when they leave. Not knowing when someone is coming in for a hug and handling the discomfort of having to fake that I want to do this with them and that it feels natural. Walking into a building and being unable to navigate around people and tables and chairs with bright lights and loud talking and loud music disrupting any and all potential for problem-solving in that environment. Low capacity for caring or feeling anything when bad things happen to friends and family. Feeling panic and a rush of anxiety when plans are changed at the last minute, or someone comes to the house unexpectedly. The panic when my phone rings, when someone rings the doorbell or knocks on the door. Trying to appear as engaged with people as I am inside but having trouble because this means I need to make eye contact and it distracts me from concentrating and listening. Struggling to find the words to explain myself even when the feelings are crystal clear in my nerve endings. Being unable to keep from blushing and nearly having a panic attack when I am brought up in conversation with a group of friends and everyone looks at me, expecting me to contribute something. The list goes on and on. But this is just the beginning. I would consider complications from my social anxiety and depression far more challenging than the unique ways I process the world through autism. Anxiety and depression are linked to many serious, chronic risks associated with cardiovascular health over time. Loneliness is also not unique to autistic people. But chronic loneliness that can trigger a depressive cycle has a high occurrence in the autistic population because of acute social difficulties. We’ve still only touched on some of the more superficial aspects of life with autism. People with autism are unique human beings with a character and personality that goes much deeper than autism. I’ve talked to women who refuse to completely define themselves by this status, and indeed the movement toward neurodiversity advocates for seeing autism as a facet of human diversity that we should try to understand and accommodate rather than demonize and incessantly try to “fix.” There are aspects of myself which I consider gifts from my ASD. I’ve described to you the intensity of joy and inspiration that I get from my “obsession cycles” and my capacity to appreciate the world with the enthusiasm and presence of a child. I also experience regularly the phenomenon of “flow” during the act the creation, whether its music or writing. I experience the sensation that time has fallen into a black hole after having spent hours working on a project, forgetting to eat, and realizing how much time has passed when my husband comes to check on me or my phone beeps at me. There are autistic women with warm personalities who love children and cooking and other autistic women who prefer to only be friends with men because they are tomboys and get along better with them and are good at video games. There are autistic women who are into New Age alternative medicine and start MeetUp groups to gather likeminded people to learn new techniques with, and other autistic women who like cars and learning new technologies and investing in the stock market and want to be the CEO of a big company someday. The more we try to put autistic people in boxes, the more we are going to be surprised. And as the statistics on the occurrence of autism in the US are showing no signs of slowing down, we are going to have to come to terms with this unique group of people who are getting ready to be fed up with the boxes and social limitations. At some point there is going to be a realization that society is just going to have to move over a little bit and make room for us, because we are the ones who may be involved in humanity’s greatest societal, technological, artistic and scientific advancements now and in the future, as it’s very likely we’ve always been. To not do so would be to deny ourselves of a very precious and unique set of assets that individuals with autism often present. T Chapter 14: Present and Future en years after graduating from University with a degree in English, I found a proofreading job with a business and marketing research company. It was part-time, and I decided it would finally get me in the door of the field that I wanted to pursue professionally. I enjoyed the work, though the same social challenges presented themselves. My boss was particularly difficult, as her personality was difficult to read and get along with. She invited me to lunch a couple of times, and I would dread these outings just like I used to dread those few minutes at the beginning of each day at Anderson when teachers gathered in the hallways to socialize before beginning the day, though I would navigate the lunch just fine and let out a sigh of relief when lunch hour ended. I felt the pride of a major victory one week when I asked one of the other proofreaders, a woman maybe a year or two younger than me, if she would like to get lunch together that day. She said yes, and I felt really good about conquering the anxiety to do it. I wanted to make new friends. I’m not antisocial. It’s just that a lot of the time I get bored with people if they don’t have something really interesting to say or have something about them I can relate to. Cheryl was super nice and funny, and we got along well during that lunch (though it was a huge struggle for me as at one point, a small section of her long hair dipped into one of the sauces she was eating with her chips. It was very difficult to keep composure, as I wanted to run away screaming and throw up). We concluded lunch saying we should do it again sometime. After another week, though, she stopped coming to work. She never told anybody at the office, including our manager. She just disappeared without a trace. I thought that was quite bizarre, and I assume there was something going on outside of work that influenced her decision, though it seemed unforgivably unprofessional. Oh well, there went a potential friendship. The truth was, I was getting pretty tired of dealing with the odd manager whose moods would randomly fluctuate from overly sensitive to overwhelmingly meticulous to frustrated. I also developed an acute anxiety surrounding the printer… Let me explain. The part of the office I worked in included the manager, the proofreaders, and two designers who would design the layout of the modules and PowerPoint slides for the course text the writers developed across the hall. We shared one color printer and one black and white printer, and any time we needed to print something out, I soon learned it was expected that we would lean in to the other room where the designers were and say something like, “printing on the black and white” to let them know the printer was in use so they wouldn’t hit the print button at the same time, causing all kinds of office turmoil. My stomach turned and my anxiety skyrocketed whenever I needed to print something, and I soon developed a habit of printing out everything I needed to proofread first thing in the morning so I wouldn’t have to worry about it too much throughout the day. A few months after I started work there, I learned about a freelance site where I could potentially find some editing work. I created a profile, which was pretty good with my experience editing for a literary agency, publishing house, magazine and school newspaper. I put up a few writing samples from when I published a couple film essays in college and looked up jobs to bid on. My very first job was a $5 gig to edit a blog post of about 500 words. I completed the work and received a glowing review, my first one to go front and center on my profile under my name and bio. It was a start. I decided I would try to build up a portfolio and history with a great success score so that someday I might be able to do freelance editing full time. It was another six months when I approached my husband about going out on a limb and giving it a try. We discussed it, and he said, go for it. I had the green light to quit my job and try the freelance editing for a few months. If I couldn’t make enough money to make ends meet, I would go back onto those familiar job search sites and get another “real” job. In my first few months of freelancing, I saw more success than I’d anticipated and was super excited about the work I was getting. I dove into each project with so much motivation to be perfect, and my clients appreciated it. Nearly everyone I worked with took the time to give me a review to showcase on my profile and I soon reached a “top rated” status on the site. From an autistic standpoint, freelance editing has provided a perfect working situation for someone with social difficulties, and I am hopeful that in this current age of freelance and remote work that can be done on the computer for clients all over the world, many more people who struggle with the standard 9 to 5 office work environment may find fulfillment and employment through freelance work. My engagement with clients is almost exclusively through email or messaging. Every now and then I will have a client who requests a Skype session or a phone call, and I oblige, getting through it just fine. I’ve found, however, that there are unique challenges that come along with working from home, especially for someone prone to anxiety and depression. Though the social element has been removed and I get to work in the comfort of my own home, I also face the slippery slope of falling into depression through a complete lack of social interaction and occasional boredom. I’m great at working out a schedule for the day, usually deciding on a certain number of pages to complete. Once that work is done, I am free to go about my day however I want. That first summer when I began freelancing full time was an incredible time. I was finding success pretty quickly, and there were lots of things to keep me busy outside of work. Most of the people in my social circle have birthdays in the summer, and we get together quite a lot to cook out or have bonfires or go to festivals, etc. It was great not ever having to say, “I need to see when I work” or “I have to leave early because I have to go to work early tomorrow,” etc. I had the freedom to move things around in my schedule to adapt to the things I really wanted to do. It felt like the ultimate freedom I’d been craving for so long. But it didn’t take long for other feelings to creep up associated with taking complete control of my financial income. I didn’t have a job where I could count on that biweekly paycheck, whether or not I worked hard throughout that time. I was now accountable for every minute and dollar I earned, and it stressed me out from week to week as I did my best to fill up my schedule and get paid from clients, a lot of whom were brand new writers and unable to pay what most professional editors ask for. It was a constant source of worry, but also a constant source of pride. As the summer turned into fall, I continued to stay busy with friends, but the activities lessened as the weather got colder. My twice weekly jogs at my favorite park would soon come to an end as I found it too cold to go out in weather below 35 degrees. When anxiety is removed from my life, I give myself time and space to think, and sometimes this leads to the darker thoughts rather than the more positive ones. I’ve always been a very introspective person and spend a lot of time thinking about truth and life and meaning and all of those tough concepts many people spend most of their lives avoiding. I moved away from religion when I began thinking and forming my own thoughts and opinions around the time I started high school. Since then, it’s been a constant preoccupation of mine to think about life and death and purpose and meaning. I am fortunate to have a source of grounding in the experience I have with dancing/meditating. I’ve tried to explain the practice in words as best I can in this book, but it is something I’ve made a point to never over-analyze. It is the closest experience I have to anything “divine” in nature, and I’m determined to leave it at that. But there is still an emptiness where purpose and meaning are concerned, especially when other people do not fill that void for you. Many people say that their kids become their lives once they have them. Family becomes everything. Well, I’ve never wanted kids and don’t plan on having any. I keep referring to Camus because I’ve never read anyone who could explain this struggle better. The absurdity of life is the constant conflict between wanting to know and never getting the answers, between getting up every day without any promise of payoff and the finish line. We all start off in life seeing a path before us and an inspiration to move forward, but once we get to a certain point, we realize what it really is we are racing toward, and it becomes necessary to assign meaning to that end that justifies the struggle for accomplishment that we continue to chase. If we are good enough and believe the right things, we enter into an eternal state of enlightenment, or we get into heaven after we die, etc. These things make life easier to take, especially when we cocoon everything comfortably inside the arms of an all-knowing, omniscient higher power who has a master plan for us. We can let every concern, every worry about the meaning of our suffering, go as we put everything “in God’s hands” and accept that we will continue to live, blind to the ultimate purpose or outcome of our lives. Without this safety net, having decided not to put faith in anything I don’t have any reason to believe in, I accept that I am in a constant pursuit of truth and authenticity in my life. I will be myself and work toward satisfaction with who I am and take pride in artistic accomplishment because I receive so much pleasure from art. I return to the state of childhood and experience the dance in its purest and most present form with no concern for anything outside of feeling the music as deeply as possible. On this solo journey, I have two options, as claimed by the existentialist thinkers. There is suicide, and there is rebellion. Camus writes a compelling argument for the act of suicide being the ultimate act of cowardice. Though having reached very deep depths in the midst of depression, I’ve seen glimpses of the degree of numbness and absence of reason involved with the level of depression that precedes suicide. There is a point at which the body rebels against pain in any way that it can, whether drugs, a mental breakdown, or suicide. But living itself can also be seen as an act of rebellion against the absurd nature of living. I get up and live each day despite knowing it will end like all the others, despite not having knowledge of any outcome to life other than death and an absolute, permanent blinking out of existence. The weight of this way of living is heaviest when I am in the middle of a depression cycle, and the deepest pain I experience stems from the most frivolous of life’s complaints—I’m not attractive enough and I’m sure my husband is going to leave or cheat on me, I can’t make enough money this week, I’m lonely and it hurts, etc. Triggers for my depression often happen when I’m upset with my husband for one reason or another, and the strain of balancing my need for him as my sole source of human warmth and giving him his space to live his own life can be excruciating when I’m feeling depressed and vulnerable. He’s always been straightforward and truthful with me, which is an incredible and rare thing, in my experience. He doesn’t mince words to try and save my feelings in most cases, and this bluntness and straightforward style of conveying information leads directly to a quick lesson. Earlier in my life I’d been around people who felt they could lie if it made me feel better, but this always leads to disappointment when the truth comes out. The truth may be hard to handle, but I believe deeply that it is always better than cushioning life with lies. As a gullible person who has fallen for lies and deceit, I appreciate when someone recognizes that they need to be straightforward with me, as I am a very literal thinker and processor. I appreciate direct communication over nuance and subtlety, which often leads me to misinterpret people and their intentions. This acknowledgement of gullibility has, however, led me to lean toward an overcompensation in the form of bitter cynicism and an assumption that anyone and everyone may be lying until they prove to me that they are not. This seems, in my mind, as the only way to really protect oneself from liars, but it also shuts people out to a severe and cold degree. Life is full of contradictions, and I don’t see how that will ever change. One day I watch a documentary on happiness or health and the next day I will watch something that completely contradicts prior belief systems. I see evidence of corruption in the highest echelons of power in our society and there seems to be no way to combat it. People offer random acts of kindness when I’m out in public, then I get yelled at and flipped off by someone in traffic because I’m following a speed limit. I hear someone offer kind words to a friend, then the minute they have their back turned, that person spews malicious rumors about him. How is the autistic person, in love with fact and literalism and reason, supposed to process these kinds of contradictions inherent in life on earth? We make our way just like anyone else. And that is one of the simplest facts I would want anyone reading about autism or learning about autism for the first time to realize and understand. Autism is not the end all/be all of a life. We are all stuck in the human condition. Autism is a variance in the way a person processes and feels the world, but in the end, we are all just trying to get through life with some level of fulfillment and peace. We all have struggles in front of our faces, some more desperate than others, that keep us occupied and distract us from the core problems that existence offers. It is my hope that in the future, there is a much larger capacity among neurotypicals for understanding and coping with the unique perspectives that people with autism offer. It would mean the world to me if one person after reading this book looks at that woman at work who seems a little off somehow and contemplates the possibility that she is dealing with something far deeper than what we see. She may not hate people, she may just be uncomfortable communicating with them in the same way everyone else does. We don’t want to shut people out, we just don’t know how to get in. I Chapter 15: Conclusion ’d like to offer some advice to anyone wondering about how to approach or engage someone with autism based on my personal situation. Obviously, I’m just one example, and there is no one exactly like me out there. However, I’ve been on numerous social media sites and forums where neurotypicals are frustrated and looking for the “key” to talking to people with autism without scaring them away. If I could broadcast a PSA to the world, I would share several bits of advice for neurotypicals trying to navigate the autistic world. When I first began writing this book, I began researching and then interviewing other women on the spectrum, asking them to share some things that they would love to let the world know about them in a general sense. A few points are listed here: “Autistic people are not necessarily antisocial. This assumption should not go hand-in-hand with the autism diagnosis. Especially for those of us who are Aspies. We can actually quite enjoy other people’s company, but the level of anxiety and discomfort grows, for me, along with the number of people present. I am most comfortable speaking with one to three people at a time, and group social settings become unnavigable for me because it is difficult to keep up with so many contributions to a single conversation, especially if the get-together is happening at an already noisy public place, like a restaurant.” “Natural social etiquette like greeting people when they arrive or saying goodbye with a hug are not natural for people with autism. It doesn’t mean they hate you. They may prefer to suddenly leave at the end of a visit rather than facing saying goodbye to everyone there and maybe having to dole out hugs. Send a text to them saying it was nice to see them instead. Be sure to make it clear that you were not offended that they didn’t want to say goodbye. A lot of the depression I experience stems from guilt that my behaviors and quirks end up offending people, making them feel like I don’t like them, when really I’m just uncomfortable expressing affection the same as others.” “I wish neurotypicals understood that autistics are unique from one to the next, and we have skills and challenges in various areas from person to person. Autism also doesn't have a ‘look.’” “I kind of wish that neurotypicals would realize that I am a nice person who just wants to be treated with honesty, understanding and friendship, and although I can be intense, that all I want is love.” “Be straight with us. We learn like anyone else. If we’ve been lied to a few times, we’re gonna be more skeptical the next time we deal with someone we don’t know or trust.” “The fastest way to a conversation with an Aspie is to ask a question about our special interest. We may also be very open to having an open conversation about personal things, but for me, I need to see that you are willing to be vulnerable and not just feed me the same crap most people do when they first meet someone. I am actually quite interested in the real you, and I’m not going to judge you for it.” “I think about the struggles I had in a work setting and I wish I could have conveyed to them in an appropriate way that I was uncomfortable socializing but also really needed their support. Approach that person who seems uncomfortable or introverted at work and start a conversation that doesn’t bombard them with questions about themselves right away. Share an experience you had recently that might relate to their job or make statements that convey that you are open to talking about anything if they need support. Don’t let them chase you away if they aren’t warming up to you instantly. Give it a little time. If you present yourself in a way that is nonthreatening and unobtrusive, they will eventually come to see you as someone they can feel comfortable approaching. But it may take you taking the initiative to interact for a while first.” And one more from me: One simple rule is, cut the bullshit. Get to the point. Say it like it is. Life is short. Thank you so much for reading my memoir, Chameleon. I hope you were able to glean some insight and comfort where Asperger’s and women are concerned, whether you have a relatable personal experience or are just recently opening your eyes to this world. Best of luck on your own journey!