Introduction W hy did you pick up this book to read, I wonder? Perhaps you heard from a friend or family member that there was a new publication on Autism and its mysteries. Or maybe you were just curious about the title and thought you’d glance inside. Whatever your reason, the fact is that you are now here, reading the first page. I’m very glad you are, because I would like to tell you about an incredible journey I have made. A journey with bold and ambitious objectives. A journey that stirs the mind! A voyage that will take you to the limit of your imagination and beyond. One that may just change your life! I hope it will! I hope that by the time you have finished reading this book, you will have a much clearer picture of what Autism is about. You will be more tolerant of Autistic people’s sometimes repetitive behaviour and excessive worries, and will understand to a greater extent why these worries take place. You will appreciate the urgent need for the right sort of support to be available to all sufferers. You will tell your friends and family of your new-found knowledge. And ultimately, when your friends tell their friends, and they tell their friends, an incredible transformation will have happened across the country. Autism will be universally known. Our fear of the unknown will have been conquered. The lives of thousands of Autistic people will change, from isolated helpless figures in mental institutions to confident people with jobs, social lives, good future prospects and above all, respect from the community as a whole. I will show, to a largely disbelieving world, that in my journey as an autistic man I was able to break the vicious circle of withdrawing into my own no-hope, make-believe world, and with the right sort of professional help have been able to achieve goals beyond my wildest dreams. We cannot deny any other Autistic person this right, for if I can do these things, other people can too. That is my journey’s boldest quest. To give them that right. And this is my story. Before we embark on my own epic life-story, let us clear up a few more general points. First the obvious question, and the one that people have been asking me for years – exactly what is Autism? In some people’s minds the term conjures up visions of someone like in the film Rainman, incredibly gifted academically in the sciences, but socially in the Dark Ages. Other people have visions of mentally retarded individuals confined to special homes, totally dependent on others, with seemingly no prospect of improvement. Still other people have never even heard the term. Can we clarify the situation? It’s tough! There is no one right answer to this question. Like the common cold, there are so many severities and variations that even the experts are sometimes baffled. We could very loosely describe Autism as a social and communication disorder, but this draws no fine lines with many other disabilities that can be present. Thus the condition is much more subtle and harder to recognise (and therefore arguably worse) than someone with an obvious disability, such as being confined to a wheelchair. This is not to say, of course, that other disabled people do not suffer, but at least their disabilities can be seen in respect to help being readily available. The fact that Autistic people can appear normal in their external appearance can make the problem far worse, since to an outsider they can simply appear badly behaved. Thus, it makes people forget that while they can do so courageously well in some areas, they are struggling to do the everyday things that most of us take for granted. You might be wondering at this point what type of ‘everyday things’ I’m referring to. Let me give you a great example – one that M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E actually happened to me. Once when I was a bit younger (but still an adult) I went to a pub on a day out with a friend who offered to buy me a drink. He didn’t say so in as many words, but simply said, ‘Drinks on the house, mate!’ I was utterly bewildered! I had no concept of this so-called social idiosyncrasy and for the next hour or two I kept won-dering why on earth they would put a drink on the roof of the pub! Would they use a ladder? How would they balance it up there if the roof was sloping? And surely if it rained, the drink would be ruined. It wasn’t until later that day, after the whole room had burst out laughing about my apparent misconception that I found out the true meaning of the phrase. The bottom line of this discussion is that most Autistic people take things very literally. They are unable to distinguish between serious conversations and the numerous so-called light-hearted remarks that occur every day requiring that special social ‘know-how’ to be able to pick up hints. This can be especially hurtful for those affected individ-uals towards the more able range of the Autistic spectrum, who have managed to establish some social skills, but are obvious targets to be taken advantage of, and additionally can often cause embarrassment without meaning to. It often results in Autistic people finding it hard to trust others, and/or withdrawing and becoming over-shy about meeting new people. It can simply be the fear of the unknown – that something might go wrong that will stop Autistic people from exposing themselves to unfamiliar situations, long before anything does actually go wrong. And the more they avoid society the worse the feelings of isolation become. To get an idea of what these feelings are, imagine that you are somehow marooned on a small island in the middle of the Pacific Ocean. It is an island with plenty of vegetables, with plenty of fruits and water to live on, a safe cave for a shelter, but no other people on the island. You have a two-way radio with which you can talk to your family, who are based in America, as often as you wish but you are never allowed to leave the island. Few people could stand this set-up for long, yet Autistic people could feel like this for years without proper treatment. I N T R O D U C T I O N Another important factor that is often overlooked by the general population is the depth of feeling of the Autistic person when faced with uncertain or stressful situations. Let us imagine a particular theo-retical situation: picture a father and his Autistic son in the dining room of their average-sized house. The father is busy writing a letter for his home business, but he has promised to take his son for a walk in the park in a few minutes. On his workdesk, amongst the usual types of accessories, is a holder for a set of pens and an average-sized wooden school ruler that Dad has kept since his heyday, placed in the middle of the desk. ‘Come on!’ says the son. ‘I want to go out.’ ‘I won’t be long,’ Dad replies, turning around slightly, ‘I just want to finish this letter.’ Dad then turns back and leans his right arm over the table to pick up a different colour pen from the holder. As he does so, his right elbow gently and innocently brushes against the ruler so that it is no longer on the desk top centre, but only just balancing on the edge. With no further jolts the ruler will probably remain, but any further movement or gust of wind and it is likely to fall, making a loud clatter on the hard stone floor. At this instant the Autistic son’s life, from his point of view, has turned into a nightmare. The whole room seems to dim apart from the ruler which seems brightly lit. Many Autistic people are very susceptible to noise and will do almost anything to avoid it – the noise, say, of a ruler clanging onto the stone floor. The ruler! The ruler! Nothing else matters. The son has a desper-ately urgent mission – he must get to the ruler. In three quick strides, heart beating, body sweating and panic breathing, he is there, pushing the ruler back to the table’s centre. He made it! Safety. The ruler will no longer fall. Extreme worry, now intense relief. Just how intense? We shall see. ‘Don’t say you’re worrying about a stupid ruler, son? Whatever next?’ Dad says, rising from his chair. ‘Are you ready for that walk?’ Just then the telephone rings and Dad steps to answer it. As he lifts the receiver he is smiling and carefree, but in a few short seconds this all changes. The smile disappears, he starts to shake, and tears well up in his eyes. It is now Dad’s turn for life to become a nightmare! It is the 1 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E police. There has been a terrible accident. The only other family member, their daughter, has been thrown out of a car by the seaside, on her holiday 100 miles away from home. She is clinging onto the top of a tall cliff with one hand, her other hand is broken. And there is a 1000-foot drop onto jagged rocks if she falls. To make matters even worse, the accident and emergency rescue people are on strike in that county, so it’s up to Dad to jump into his car and go and rescue her! What sort of thoughts are going through Dad’s mind as he climbs into his car? His daughter cannot hold on for ever. At any moment she may be forced to let go. And how many moments are there in a 100-mile drive? ‘Feelings of utter dread’ is an understatement. Now imagine the relief, the joy, and the unbounded happiness if Dad does get to the cliff in time, and pulls his daughter to safety. Now this is where we get to the good part. I asked you how much the Autistic son was worrying about that ruler falling on the stone floor and making a noise. Well, I’ll tell you. He was just as worried as Dad was when he got that phone call! All the agony, all the dread, exactly the same intensity. And the relief felt when that ruler was pushed back on the table was every bit as great as when Dad managed to save his daughter! This fact may be hard to grasp for many people – this is what this condition can do to some of us. I have described above an example of what I call the ‘life/death comparison’. For all those parents out there, the next time your Autistic son or daughter makes a comment about something that appears to be totally trivial, it is worth considering for a moment this comparison – consider the depth of what their anxiety might be. It should be stressed that not all Autistic people worry as acutely as this. Often, with the right sort of help many phobias can be overcome before they reach crisis point. But the condition does exist. It’s not always easy to keep your temper when your child is clearly driving you mad. The task of coping with things day after day should not be done alone in any case. It is too big a job for parents to expect to do all on their own. That is why professional help must be sought (more on this in the later chapters). I N T R O D U C T I O N 1 1 But it’s all very well saying ‘seek professional help for the Autistic person’. Many parents would be extremely glad to even be in this position, in recognising that Autism is the problem that needs to be solved. We first need to ‘recognise’ the Autism. This can be a very diffi-cult thing to do. If noticing someone in a wheelchair could be compared to noticing a flat tyre on your car, or locating a road on our local town map, then noticing the symptoms of Autism will be like knowing what is wrong with your car when it just won’t start because of some internal malfunction, or of trying to find a road in your local town from a large-scale map of England with only the A roads shown. Parents should always trust their gut-feeling about their child’s behav-iour – after all, they’ve lived with him all their lives. Most important, if they suspect Autism, they should seek out help from people who specifically know about the condition. Seeking advice from people without this background knowledge could be disastrous (see Chapter 1). Given the critical importance of recognising the condition of Autism in the first place, what are the tell-tale signs to look for? At an early age, most normal children are able to attract their parents’ atten-tion to something that has caught their interest, even if they don’t know the right words; for example, a child seeing a plane in the sky for the first time would be likely to point at it and make a sound, to which the normal reaction from the parent will be: ‘That is an aeroplane!’ It is through this development that the child can pick up and develop knowledge on an ever-increasing vocabulary of words. In sharp contrast, the Autistic child is far more likely not to point at such an object, and indeed will fail to make any sound at all, resulting in the parent not being given the opportunity to voice words. Thus the ability of the child to develop new words and knowledge is severely impaired. In addition, from about 14 months of age many Autistic people have a lack of any imaginative play routine such as playing with a toy train and making a ‘choo-choo’ sound, or having any concept of what the object really is. They also often lack ability to copy actions or instructions from their parents when being asked to ‘mouth’ new words, etc. 1 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E Most parents will of course be aware that there is always that certain inquisitive age where speech has been mastered, at least par-tially, and every other minute the questions keep coming: ‘Dad, what is this?’ ‘Mum, what is this food, and why is it this colour?’ ‘Dad, what are houses made out of?’ This may no doubt get very tiring at times, but it is an important process of learning for the child. Many bits of knowledge assembled during this period can be stored in the long-term memory for life. In contrast the Autistic child will generally ask very few questions, or even none. Consequently, the chance to assemble knowledge is once again reduced, and the affected child will often withdraw into his ‘own world’ of phobias and perhaps stereo-type and repetitive behaviour. In order to make progress, it is vital that the gap between the fantasies and the real world is bridged, at least partially, and communication is the vital key here. Sign language and computerised methods of talking should be considered if verbal speech is absent or very small. Without this the child will have no means of revealing his frustrations to the real world and his parents, and will ‘bottle things up’ in a vicious circle. Details of methods of communication and how to apply them to the Autistic person should be sought out from authorities with specific knowledge and training in the condition. The difficulties that Autistic people have in developing their language skills is also self-evident because from an early age most show no interest in mixing with other children, for example at school, and will tend to remain by themselves, making them an obvious target for bullies. The medical aspects as to what actually causes Autism are very complex, and believed to be asso-ciated with an inability of certain parts of the brain to function normally. It is not my intention to discuss this in any great depth, since a number of texts have been produced, and interested people should refer to these. It is my opinion that there are a number of questions that cannot be answered by a medical journal, such as the mental feelings within the condition. As someone affected, rather than a non-Autistic author, I liken this to trying to judge a book by its cover alone. It is on these questions that I hope to concentrate most of my book. I N T R O D U C T I O N 1 3 An important point must be made before we progress. I shall be referring to myself as an Autistic man throughout the text, and in the most general sense this is correct. However, I wish to make it clear that I actually suffer from a specific form of Autism known as Asperger Syndrome (AS). At the more able end of the full variety of Autistic characteristics, the phrase is often, although incorrectly, assumed to be a more mild version of general Autism. In fact it is merely a specialised form of the condition which can in its own way be just as devastating a handicap as any other form of Autism. I shall attempt to clarify the sit-uation briefly, but interested readers who wish to know the precise medical differences between the two should consult the diagnostic manuals, the most recent currently being the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV (Washington, DC: American Pyschiatric Association, 1994). It is certainly true that the three core difficulties experienced by Autistic people in general are also present in Asperger individuals. These difficulties are: 1. Problems understanding social language (as in our drink on the roof example). 2. An inability to know what is socially acceptable (for instance, not to stick out your tongue in public). 3. Difficulties in relationships. However, people with AS tend to be more verbal and have a pretty good grasp of literal vocabulary, and additionally will often have par-ticular interests of a specific nature such as the study of the sciences. The fact that many of these individuals attempt to form relationships, which then run into problems when the partner has not understood the special needs of the sufferer, is in its own way even harder for the affected one than for the more general Autistic person, who perhaps was never able to form a friendship in the first place and thus was spared the pain of rejection. It is nearly time to begin our journey though my life-story: a journey which is to end with two Maths degrees, several public 1 4 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E appearances on national TV, giving talks on Autism up to interna-tional level all across the country, and a genuine passionate desire to help others through teaching, and increasing the awareness of the general population that ‘from this day forward’ a new age has sprung. The difficulties and restrictions of Autism can be overcome – it has been proved. I have been talking quite generally so far, and in Appendix 1 of this book I shall do so again. I shall ask how in a material sense we can actually set about making this transformation. There are things that every parent of a sufferer, no matter how bad, can do to set this change in process. But for now, you might ask, how were all these achievements possible? Behind every one of my major achievements is a long list of smaller ones, which had to be mastered step by step. And behind every one of those was required a great deal of sacrifice, pain, planning and willpower. Let us delay no longer! Sit down in a comfortable chair, get yourself settled, and strap yourself in if you’re the jumpy type! Let’s go! I N T R O D U C T I O N 1 5 C H A P T E R 1 The Early Years Years 0–9 T he human heartbeat! There are few things more natural and yet fundamentally essential for the existence of all individuals. It was the repeating beats of my Mum’s heart that were my first memory. And her breathing. I was aware of my surroundings – I could see shapes, mainly red, but different shades of red. The darkest shades were almost black, the lightest shades almost yellow. The shapes seemed to move left and right at times, at other times there was almost no movement. And the speed of the heartbeats and the breathing seemed to vary, sometimes slow, sometimes quicker, once or twice very quickly. At these later times I was aware of certain jolts or bumps. I could also hear sounds like mumbled voices. Could this be that I was aware of things while still inside my mother, experiencing her ‘rest’ times with slower heartbeat and active times with a quicker one? Or could the ravages of time have blurred my memory so that these are only echoes of dreams or sightings in my young life after I was born? To this day I am undecided. Perhaps this is destined to stay a mystery, one of the deep unexplainables of all human lives. This much is known. At about 5pm on 3 May 1967, I, Marc Reuben Fleisher, was born in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, with one older sister, Tanya (about two and a half ), and my Mum Paula (about 30) , and Dad Maurice (about 35). In the first few years there were no abnormalities, at least none acutely visible to the rest of my family, to suggest I was to have a medical disability label. Yet in my mind some-thing deep down told me I was never destined to be quite like most other people. But in the innocence of youth, when one day seems like an eternity, slow development can be forgiven. It was only later, much later, when the normal child is expected to develop that my differ-ences became infinitely more marked. Up to the age of four, it was largely in my mind alone that I was somehow different. My family tree was quite a large one, but partly due to my lack of ability or interest in socialising at an early age I only really got to know a few of my immediate relations well. Among them was my Mum’s brother, Peter, and his wife Renate, who was born in Germany. They were known to me as Uncle Peter and Aunty Renate, and we used to go and visit them from time to time at their home in Beaconsfield. They had three daughters, Nicola, Sally and Katie, all of whom worked at Heathrow at one point. Peter himself had had an active past serving in the merchant navy, followed by a job in the building trade. In my early childhood he was running a newsagent’s in Beaconsfield quite close to his home, while later he went on to run a tea shop within a large store. On the other side of the family, my Dad had a cousin called Sid who was a printer. His wife was called Doreen. These two were probably best thought of as second cousins to me. The interesting fact about them was that they had a child called Ian who was also known to be Autistic. It is a strange fact that there are about four times as many males who are Autistic as there are females. In my early years often I made no distinction between times when the whole family was present and when they were not. I would much rather go and play with my toy train and track set, for example, instead of sitting and talking with the others. My Dad also had another cousin called Monty and wife Lorna. It wasn’t until much later in life that I became more aware of the importance of family relations and how they fit into the overall struc-ture of a person’s past. We lived in an average-sized, four-bedroom house in Pakenham, a small village only a few miles away from the town of Bury St T H E E A R L Y Y E A R S : Y E A R S 0 – 9 1 7 Edmunds. From an early age I seemed able to picture scenes and prop-erties of this house and the surrounding neighbourhood. Our house, for example, was one of three close but detached neighbouring houses, each of which had one very large tree at the bottom of its garden. Our own tree was a giant horse chestnut, which had one of its branches hanging quite low down over the roadway at the bottom of the gardens. My sister and I used to watch every time a double-decker bus drove past. It would hit the branch, and we always wondered if it would be knocked off. The big tree next door was an ash, which always came into leaf later than any other tree I knew (about mid-June). At the bottom of our back garden there was a playing field with some swings in it, and farmland lay beyond this. The images of these things, characteristics of the landscape, and countless others, have been kept deep within my mind, like a photographic memory – a rapid succession of slides, each showing a key moment or place in my early life. Of course I had many of the experiences that any normal child might expect to encounter in the first five years. Falling off my bike into the nettles, this was a bad day. Celebrating Christmas, this was a good day. I also had dreams that any young boy might have; for example, I used to dream I could fly. But there were also other dreams, perhaps less normal. Two of these stand out. The first probably stems from the fact that in my bedroom I had a light almost above my bed with a light-shade that was rather loose. I used to imagine that this light-shade would fall on top of my face, and get stuck there. I then had to say the continuous sound ‘eeeee’ for perhaps an hour, some-times less, sometimes more, until the light-shade had mercy on me and let me run to the rest of the family. And while I was stuck with the light-shade, although I could hear other people’s voices, I had this overwhelming feeling of helplessness, that I was in a situation beyond my control. I’m not sure where the ‘eeeee’ sound stemmed from, although it could have been from a tree, since a tree was visible outside my bedroom window, so maybe that got stuck in my memory. The second nasty dream was even more frightening. It involved the chimney of our house (and other houses) having magic powers. I 1 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E would only be safe if I was inside the house with all the windows shut – otherwise I would be lifted up through the air and end up stuck on the chimney-pot, having to say the word ‘Tuf!’ repeatedly. This word might have stemmed from ‘tough object’, for a chimney-pot is gener-ally strong and can withstand most (if not all!) the elements. Although being shut up in the house might have left me vulnerable to ‘eeeing’ the light, this was infinitely preferable to ‘Tufing’ the chimney, because the light usually had mercy on me at some point, and I was never stuck under the light-shade for more than half a day. Indeed I sometimes bargained, saying to the light-shade, ‘If I eeeee you for two hours this morning, can I be with Mum for the rest of the day?’ To which the light-shade would agree. In sharp contrast, if the chimney caught me, I really would be stuck on the roof for ever and ever – the chimney never had any mercy. I even dreamt I had to stay on the chimney-pot when there was a fire in the house and smoke coming out, so that I was coughing as well as saying the word ‘Tuf’. Once I had a particularly vivid episode of this latter dream. I was walking back to our house after a day out with Mum, Dad and Tanya when I suddenly felt myself being lifted up through the air towards the chimney-pot. I screamed ‘No!’ and in desperation held hands with my sister and Mum and Dad, trying to keep on the ground. Eventually the pull of the chimney was too strong and one by one I had to let go of the other family members. I felt numb, helpless and terribly afraid, afraid of a dread that would never go away. My family just stood and watched, unable to help. Of course these were just childhood dreams, and yet I believe there is a deeper significance to them in my life in general. I feel that almost subconsciously during my first five years I was aware that I was different from other people; that I had problems that other people couldn’t understand, and could end up watching others live normal lives with me being alone with my phobias. I also felt that the worries would last for ever. The eternity of my time spent on an imaginary chimney-pot could be seen as a virtual parallel to the fact that Autism is a life-long condition, although of course at that time I don’t think any of our family (or most of the world in the early T H E E A R L Y Y E A R S : Y E A R S 0 – 9 1 9 1970s) understood the term. Most of the detailed research has been done only recently. I attended nursery school for a period when I was about four years old where I used to like playing with the various toys there on my own, but had no interest in talking to any of the other children. I did get upset after a while, however, when one child called Ros Poz used to try to keep every toy. My social difficulties plus my unusual phobias as a youngster had so far not been significantly noticed, but this was about to change when I turned five. On one side of our home there was a large collection of small trees and shrubs, and on the other side of this was a primary school – very convenient in terms of walking there, for it was here that I started attending school full time. For the first time I was in an environment where most children would be expected to start at least some correspondence with others. It was about this period that my apparent inability to mix caught the attention of my Mum, who realised something was not quite right. In addition there were also other little incidents that were making me stand out. One day, on a long and hot summer afternoon, my teacher was sitting outside the school buildings in the cool shade of the big oak tree with the class, reading the famous story of ‘Icarus the bird’, which as legend has it flew too close to the sun so that his feathers started to burn off. Right in the middle of this story the teacher was suddenly interrupted by a loud voice from one of her listeners, remarking, ‘STOP! STOP! DON’T BOTHER READING THIS ANY MORE! THIS INFORMATION IS STUPID! HOW COULD A BIRD FLY ANYWHERE NEAR THE SUN? NOT ONLY IS THERE A TOTAL LACK OF OXYGEN IN OUTER SPACE, BUT BY THE TIME THIS BIRD GOT ABOVE THE TROPOSPHERE IT WOULD HAVE FROZEN TO DEATH!’ The teacher looked dumbstruck! Then she looked rather annoyed, saying, ‘Be quiet, no talking when I’m speaking please.’ Now that voice was mine, and unknown to the teacher I had been reading a book on the levels of the atmosphere beforehand, and had memorised every single detail. Even at this early age I had a great love of astronomy and mathematics, could count in the thousands easily, and now was expressing what I had learnt. 2 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E This incident illustrates not one but two important concepts of the Autistic child. On the one hand my incredible factual knowledge and ability to remember facts was taking lots of people by surprise. On the other hand I did not have the social sense to wait until the end of the story before expressing my views. The point is that I had taken every-thing literally, and was unable to distinguish between fact and fiction. I was also unable to sort many physical aspects of everyday living unless I had been shown exactly. A good example of this is when my Mum showed me one morning how to tie up my shoelaces. Later my Mum had to go out for the rest of the morning and while she had gone I felt the urge to go out in the garden. Sure enough, I remembered how to tie my shoelaces up to go out…but…when I came back in the house there I was, stuck in my shoes for the whole morning getting blisters, because I had not been shown how to untie the shoelaces. I was not able to relate this to tying them up in reverse. In response to her growing realisation of my oddities, when I was about five my Mum took me to seek advice, from a young inexperi-enced doctor who had no understanding of Autism at all. This was to turn out to be a grave mistake for it ended up with the doctor calling me mentally retarded, something which my Mum was so upset about she never really got over it. And there was very little she could do in the few years that followed, for the condition was just not understood well enough. All she had was her faith that I was clearly not that bad, was very talented in some areas, but just had strange phobias and fixa-tions in others. There are few things that are worse for a mother than having something wrong with your child but not knowing what it is, for in this case you do not know how to help. How she coped with these early years I don’t know. All I will say is that she was a very strong person. There were one or two additional and unusual features that my parents were noticing. I was developing a strange restricted diet, having no milk, eggs, vegetables and a host of other foods that a growing child would expect to be having. The only meat I ate was sausages, and I only accepted them if they were a particular type of small sausage (Bowes). Anything else in the way of a sausage I refused T H E E A R L Y Y E A R S : Y E A R S 0 – 9 2 1 to eat! I loved peanuts as well, and I got my protein from both these foods. I ate cereals, bread and Marmite, some chocolate, and crisps and chips for carbohydrates, but very little else. And so it went on, year after year, with my only main cooked meal being sausages and chips – 365 days a year, including Christmas Day and New Year’s Day! This extraordinary feat surprised my family. For most people, eating other meat and food as well, this would be a very unhealthy diet. And yet I appeared to latch on to the food and seemed healthy. I was told slightly later in life that the reason for this is that my body has a strange metabolism (the doctor’s verdict) and that I was somehow obtaining most of the nutrients I needed. The restricted diet syndrome is in fact a characteristic of many Autistic people, who discover certain types of food they like and then want to stick with them, not changing for anything else. I had no desire to try other foods. Even the thought of anything else, especially items not solid such as mashed potato, made me feel sick. One day my Mum had to go out and it was left to my Dad to do the cooking. As she left, Mum said to Dad ‘Don’t forget to put the potatoes on for Marc’, meaning the potatoes were to be peeled and then cooked as chips. But Dad had misunderstood, for both he and Tanya were having mashed potato that day, and it was thought I had decided to try some as well. When they dished up the food I was horrified, and promptly burst into tears! I was made to at least try a bit because it was now cooked, and was physically sick as a result. Yet my Dad only wanted what was best for me. Any ordinary naughty youngsters might try to refuse food they didn’t like if they thought they could get away with it, and this would not be for their own good. At the time I could not have expected any more understanding because my condition was not known by the family. It was my sister who provided a vital separation from my feelings of isolation in not being able to make other friends. She was the only person of roughly my own age to whom I could relate. We played countless games, both inside and out. We had two trees, standing side by side in the shrubbery between our house and the school, which we used to climb. One was Tan’s tree, the other mine. Of course, being 2 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E slightly older than me, Tan did have certain rights (seemingly!). For example, she was always allowed to sit in the front seat of the car wherever we went on a journey by road, which was a little pet hate of mine at the time. But overall I can honestly say that the only happy times I ever spent with someone else of a similar age during this period were the times with my sister. My Dad was working in the video pro-duction industry full time, and my Mum also had a number of part-time jobs including working in a local sweet shop, so inevitably there were many occasions when I had to play on my own. (My sister was perhaps busy or occupied with other friends, because she could make friends from an early age, and frequently did.) It was in these times on my own that I first discovered something I loved doing in the process of playing. This was to mimic events in the real world, chiefly the natural or prehistoric world, because I had no concept at this stage of how humans operated a modern technical society. For example, if I was splashing lots of water in the bath, and spilt some on the floor, I would make a big noise, imagining that a huge tidal wave had just occurred somewhere on earth, perhaps in the Pacific Ocean. I had read about dinosaurs, and if I knocked my toys over it would be as if a huge dinosaur had knocked some trees down 100 million years ago, in some prehistoric swamp. If I fell over and hurt myself, or had an accident and hurt my knee, etc., I would parallel this with a more serious event in the world, such as the possible asteroid hitting the earth and wiping out the dinosaurs. For just as this had a far greater effect on all types of life-form 65 million years ago, so I would never forget when I hurt my knee, and even years later be wary of slippery icy surfaces! The process by which I was comparing my actions with other events had a far deeper significance than just childhood fantasies. As we shall see, this was just the mere splattering, less than 1 per cent of 1 per cent of what was to come in later years – all shall be revealed! But at this point the key principle of evading responsibility should be known. It was almost as if I was afraid of the responsibilities of my actions, and wished instead to think of it being an event or happening elsewhere, thus avoiding blame. It may have been a deep-rooted T H E E A R L Y Y E A R S : Y E A R S 0 – 9 2 3 subconscious fear of looking stupid, or looking the fool, having already been teased on numerous occasions at school. I developed a fixation with time, and when I got kept in after school one day for an extra half an hour because I was stuck on some homework, I was upset for weeks afterwards, fearing the same thing would happen again. When I was about eight I left the primary school next door and started attending a rather bigger school in Ixworth, a large village about two or three miles away from us. This involved catching a school bus each morning, and as we were the last stop on the route before the school it was nearly always fairly full up. I used to hate it when I had to stand up, since any jolt on the bus would mean I would nearly fall over, or knock into someone, and often the children would call out or laugh to see me trip up. It ended up with me turning up at the bus stop about 45 minutes early, just to get in the front of the queue to get a seat. With this worry getting out of proportion, I often braved the elements and stood out in the pouring rain, or snow. We have had a brief insight into my early life, a life with the loving care of my parents, my sister for company, and a life with many happy memories; maybe one with strange behavioural patterns in me on occasions, but in the innocence of youth these could perhaps be forgiven. After all, so long as the family stuck together surely these phobias couldn’t get the better of us. This may have been awkward at times, but they were about to get infinitely worse. A chance event, totally unpredicted and without any warning, would make certain of this. My world and the state of my family were soon to be changed for ever. In order to discover why, we shall have to enter the next phase of my life story, from the age of 10 to 13, which was one of the most trau-matic and yet also most crucial periods of my existence. 2 4 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E C H A P T E R 2 Crisis Time Years 10–13 W hen I was ten years old, my life in Suffolk came to an end as we moved house to Berkshire to a place in Barkham Ride (near Wokingham). This was a result of my Dad getting a new job, still in the video and TV industry, but in a new area. We had not been there long before one of my sister’s dreams came true – she owned a horse for the first time, called Pepper. Tanya had always loved horses and riding and had always wanted to own one. My first impressions of the new home were not that good however, even if it was similar in size to our previous one. I sensed it somehow felt unlucky, dark, almost spooky, as if our family should not have moved, and that a dark period for everyone was on the horizon. As we shall see, almost like a sixth sense (a premonition) these fears were not unfounded. The family had all been working quite hard with the move and my parents felt we needed a break, so they set up a holiday in southern France for us. We had been on holidays in England before but this was the first time of going abroad, and we all looked forward to the hot weather expected. On 13 May 1978 the journey began. We had already crossed the Channel, had just eaten in a service station close by, and now started the long drive down through the country to nearly its southernmost tip where our holiday destination was. But we never got to our destination. Instead, something terrible happened, something that was to throw my already difficult passage through Autistic life into turmoil, and catapult it into one over a thousand times harder, and ensure that things would never be the same for our family again. It all happened so quickly. One moment we were driving along talking and laughing. Then a burst tyre, the car swerving all over the road. We skidded towards the grass verge, which for most of its entirety along that stretch of road was just grass. But a stray bollard, a solid object sticking out of the ground which would not move, lay in our way. Instead of just stopping, our car therefore turned right over. The next thing I knew I was rolling over and over in the grass. Then I stopped rolling and felt the pain – terrible pain. I saw luggage and clothes and squashed food packets everywhere in the grass. I saw my Mum and Dad stagger out of the car, walking around dazed trying to pick things up. And my sister – I could not see her anywhere. Then I saw an ambulance that had come for us. In great pain I uttered the words, ‘Ambulance. Hospital.’ It was all that mattered, for us to get to a place that eased the pain. Other cars sped by, some slowed to have a look; one man even took a photo of us, maybe a reporter for a news-paper. Then I was inside the ambulance on the way to hospital. But this was not a hospital I knew. It was a strange French hospital. I was for a while separated from the family and taken into a strange room with doctors touching and examining me with all sorts of instru-ments, to assess my injuries. The worst thing was the language. I had never learnt French. I asked to go to the bathroom. I asked for some water. I said, ‘Where are my Mum and Dad?’ But no one seemed to understand what I was saying. I had always compared having Autism as being like someone lost in a strange country with an unknown language and having to ask for help. Now this comparison was coming true, literally, in the extreme. Eventually, after what was probably not very long but seemed like an eternity, I was reunited with my Mum and Dad, who had got away with just minor scratches. I was hurt with serious although not life-threatening bruises, including near one of my eyes. For a couple of minutes I felt relief. As long as we were 2 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E together we would somehow pull through. But then another thought – how badly hurt was my sister? Then Mum and Dad told me. I would never see my sister again. She was thrown out of the car when it turned over. She never stood a chance. Doctors had tried to revive her in vain. ‘But this can’t be true,’ I thought. It must be a nightmare. A nightmare that any minute I would wake up from. Our holiday plans now in ruins, we flew home to England in a private jet, where I spent a few days in a local hospital recovering from my bruises. Then one day shortly after, we drove home, where our ginger cat ran to greet us just as it always did. But there was a terrible numbness, emptiness, the whole family had simply not taken it all in yet. The terrible reality was that I had not only lost my dear sister, but also seemingly my only window on the outside world for communicating with someone of my own age. In the days and weeks that followed, with the tears, frustration and arguments as reality sank in, I was having to cope not only with my Autism, which can magnify greatly every slight anxiety, but also with the family grief that anyone would go through after an occurrence of this magnitude. With my sister now gone, there was nothing to break the terrible feeling of isolation (that I had always felt to some extent) now running riot. I started retreating into my make-believe parallel world much more intensely, for a cloud hung over us in real life. So in my parallel world too, conditions were of death, mirroring the image of the great ice ages that occurred across northern Europe about 12,000 years ago. There were no plants, no vegetation, the sparkle and the flowers of life had gone. There was just coldness, darkness, and the terror of total iso-lation that can only be pictured if you imagined that you too were lost, not just somewhere on earth today, but in a time in the distant past where the only help you would ever find would be from primitive people living in caves. Then, in the midst of all this sorrow, one day I had another vision, a premonition possibly. I told my parents about it. I saw that we would move house again, to make a fresh start. We would move into a four-bedroom house with a hall floor slightly raised, with steps going down to both the kitchen and the lounge. And just a few months later C R I S I S T I M E : Y E A R S 1 0 – 1 3 2 7 this incredibly came true, almost exactly as I had described. Our third home was in Booker, near the town of High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. I can’t know fully how I had these visions – they normally only happen when I am under a lot of stress. And this move was the start of a sequence of events that would lead to my Autism being recognised. My schooling was in a total mess. I had changed schools about six or seven times after my sister’s death. No one had known quite what was wrong with me, but I was being bullied and teased nearly all the time (on one occasion hiding nearly all day in the bathroom). This was about to change. When I was 11, our new local doctor in High Wycombe was listening to my parents’ concern over me when he made a recommendation that we went to see a brilliant lady in London who was expert in recognising disabilities. This turned out to be a real turning point, as within five minutes of seeing me she had diagnosed me as Autistic. My parents had spent nearly my whole life wondering about my strange behavioural difficulties without really knowing where to turn. The relief that they felt at this moment was identical to the instant when our hypothetical Autistic boy pushed that ruler back onto his Dad’s workdesk! Now at last they had found the key to an explanation for my many phobias. They had an understanding what my problems were. The next question however was what they could do about it. The lady who had diagnosed me then told us about a place in Chinnor, Oxfordshire, called the Chinnor Resource Unit for Autistic Children, at this time (1980) about the only one of its kind in the country. Even though the place was about ten miles away and in a different county, my parents decided to send me there. It was one of the best decisions they ever made. The main idea of this unit, a small building next door to the normal primary school (St Andrew’s, Chinnor), was to integrate affected pupils into the mainstream school next door (and later into local sec-ondary schools, etc.), but always with the support and back-up of the unit staff who are all thoroughly trained in the condition. This support normally took the form of a member of staff ‘sitting in’ with the pupil in lesson times, but also included specific periods each week where the 2 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E individual concerned spent time in the specialised unit, for help more intensively available than would normally be found in the main school. Examples of such help could be for shopping and cooking; for example, a group of us would be sent into the village to buy simple products such as margarine or butter used in cooking, learning how to use money in the process. We would then return to the unit and learn how to cook and prepare food using the items that we had bought. This would be a vital skill in later life. The unit’s operation began in the early 1970s, so by the time I started attending (1980) there were already plenty of other pupils. The vital ingredient here of course was that all the staff knew and had first-hand experience of Autism. In particular, whereas my parents had done everything for me, the unit staff challenged my ability to do things. I had to figure out problems using logical step-by-step argu-ments. On the other hand, if I ever really was stuck or got in a panic, whether in the classroom or with an activity in the unit itself, the staff would step in to rescue me, knowing that it is equally important not to push too hard or, as the saying goes, ‘Don’t run before you can walk.’ Of course, often I did not appreciate this help at the time; after all I was still quite young and it just seemed like hard work. But subconsciously, deep down, this unique combination of specialised, trained help and support, along with periods in the mainstream school so as not to lose contact with other ordinary pupils, was worth its weight in gold. For a start, I began making great strides in my academic work, as I felt I was working in a safer environment where people understood me. I had quite a few gaps in my knowledge as a result of my disrupted or missed schooling in previous years, but what I did know I knew well, and I was able to fill in many of those gaps quite quickly. Another particular form of help that stands out in my memory was a ‘social skills’ group run inside the unit once a week after lessons. In this group we were made to act out role play of situations that could happen to any one of us socially in real life. For example, suppose a stranger came up to you in the street and said, ‘Your trousers are looking raggy – you really should dress better than that, you know.’ How would you best handle it without causing an argument? Or suppose you found a sheep C R I S I S T I M E : Y E A R S 1 0 – 1 3 2 9 loose in the lane and a broken farm fence – who could you trust to help you? This was especially useful since many of us Autistic people had not had the chance to experience such events through socialising on our own, yet they would be memorised for later life. The other pupils in the unit had the Autistic condition in various degrees of severity. Those worst affected could hardly talk at all, and any time spent in the mainstream school next door was either very limited or absent at that time, simply because they were not judged to be ready; first their confidence had to be built up through activities within the unit itself. However, there were many others, including myself, who were able to spend some time in the classroom, at first with a unit staff member always present. The best part I found however was that the more used to the class environment I got, and the more confident I became, this support could be slowly but surely with-drawn. Ultimately I was spending nearly all the time in mainstream classes on my own, safe in the knowledge that I could report straight back to the unit after the lesson if I had any worries. The manifestations of my condition were still surfacing in unex-pected ways. I had a fixation with time which was to lead to a major worry. My mother had been driving me to and from Chinnor for the first few weeks, but it was decided that as I was likely to be with this unit help for several years this was not practical. I would have to learn to catch the bus from Chinnor to High Wycombe. At first a member of staff always waited at the Chinnor bus stop until the bus came, but after a while I was made to wait on my own. This caused untold tears – it was all very well if the bus was on time (but how often does this happen these days?). If the bus was even one minute late I started to worry, by five minutes I would virtually be in a panic. I felt that if the bus did not come I would be stuck there at the bus stop all night, in a situation beyond my control. It was the same at the other end. My Mum always met me on the main West Wycombe Road to drive me up the Booker Hill on the last mile home. If she wasn’t there, or even a couple of minutes late, I always feared the worst – that I would be stuck on the main road, or that she had had an accident, or that her car had broken down, once again a situation where I felt helpless. 3 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E As well as continuing to have excessive worries such as this, I still often mimicked events that had happened to me and imagined that they were in fact other events in my make-believe fantasy world, to evade the responsibility of a concern. I did now have a small amount of understanding of how normal people communicated and made deci-sions, and in my parallel world it had reached the stage where, as in real history say 6000 years ago, civilisation had gained a foothold, but there was little evidence of what we now call modern society. This was at the Rubicon between historic and prehistoric times. Once when my Chinnor bus was particularly late, I imagined a parallel event; a whole tribe of cave people had got imprisoned inside their cave by a rockfall and felt hopelessly trapped and running out of air. By imagining these happenings, it was almost as if I had found a retreat, a place to go, a way of escaping all my worries and dealing with my anxieties. Despite all my achievements academically to date, and my parents’ knowledge of my Autism, there was always the gap, the terrible gap of my missing sister. In 1980 our family discussed the possibility of bringing someone new into the family. We had approached a local adoption agency who in turn spoke to other agencies about our wishes. Now one of these agencies had become aware of a Chinese girl in Hillingdon who was ready for long-term fostering or adoption. This girl was called Po-Ling (which translated means ‘Treasure Bell’!) and she was about four years younger than me. She came to live with us for a few months on a fostering basis, but we all got on so well with her that in 1981, when Po-Ling was aged nine, this turned to adoption. She could never bring Tanya back of course, or stop us having fond memories of her, but there was once again laughter in our house. Those age-old forgotten games that I had played with Tanya I could now play again with Po-Ling, bike rides, computer games, sledding in the snow. This was the time to rejoice in new life – I had a new sister to relate to. My parallel world at this moment had moved forward to about 2000 years ago when (we are told in the Bible about actual events) the world was rejoicing in new life – the birth of Christ. Po-Ling might have been Chinese, but she was not Autistic, and it wasn’t long before C R I S I S T I M E : Y E A R S 1 0 – 1 3 3 1 she found other friends as well. She was much more of an extrovert than I was, and quite confident socially once she had settled into our family. I’m sure that Mum and Dad must have felt happier too now we felt like a full family again. Of course we had the occasional disagree-ments, such as who had the right on which day of the week to watch the nice big TV in the lounge or the small portable one upstairs, me or my sister. But this was only a natural result of having a sister, and we had countless happy memories together lost in the mists of childhood, and others that will be remembered always. One factor that had hampered any social development with the other children in the mainstream Chinnor School, apart from my Autism, was the fact that I was up to two years older than the rest of them. I was simply catching up with my lost or disrupted schoolwork from earlier years. But in the autumn of 1980, for the first time I was sent to the nearby Thame Lower School with pupils of my own age, 13. Now most of these pupils had spent three years in this lower school from 11 years old, so I had to fit straightaway into the highest year, but still with the crucial support of the Chinnor unit who drove me into Thame and attended lessons with me. This became more important again for a while because I had ‘jumped’ two years and the standard of work was higher here, so often I had to rely upon the unit staff members taking notes, in case I had queries later. At this time there were actually two lower schools in Thame, Lower School West and Lower School East, and I attended Lower School East. I was quite shocked about the extra workload, sometimes two or three hours of homework a night. Many of my Autistic phobias continued at this period, and I devel-oped many new ones. I saw my homework as tasks that had to be done straightaway, full stop. Being able to finish it became an obsession to the point that when I went home I often went without a proper tea, or missed out on a favourite TV show I had been looking forward to all week. Once when there was something on about astronomy for about 20 minutes soon after I got in, I missed it because I was unable to see that I could do anything else until I had finished my work; the thought of having to come back to it was unbearable. I was a bit of a 3 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E perfectionist and wanted to achieve perfect results all the time, and then became very frustrated when this didn’t always happen. I was having to cope with many new ideas; this was the age of discovery and the power of intelligent thinking. My parallel world resembled the real one in the 1700s and 1800s with the planet opening up to new frontiers and new discoveries. My power of reasoning also increased in this period. I was getting more used to catching buses, and although I still worried terribly when they were late I knew that the drivers worked on a rota of three-week shifts and one particular driver was always late, so every third week I knew what to expect. I tried to force myself not to worry until ten minutes longer than usual had passed. But I was also asking other questions, not all of which could be answered. One thought was: ‘Surely the universe must be of infinite size, for if not it would have an edge, and what is outside the edge? If it’s just empty space, that in itself could be classed as more universe.’ But what I was unable to realise at this stage in my development is that maybe it is just our perception that the universe is infinite. For just as in three dimensions a fly could walk along the same path round a spherical ball (suspended somehow in air) for ever, where the ball itself is of finite size, an identical truth may hold in higher dimensions, where space itself is curved and if you started in a particular three-dimensional point and kept moving in a straight line for long enough you would eventually come back to where you started. Despite all these intriguing scientific questions, my social life was virtually non-existent, and my knowledge of how to dress up for a school disco was about as far behind ordinary people of this age as is modern society man to a bushbaby. Mostly at this stage I did not even have any interest in meeting people, although as we shall see this did not stay true in the upper school and in later years (see next chapter). But at this point I would much rather retreat into my own world of imaginary happenings, or ponder intriguing questions like the square roots of –1. The concept of imaginary numbers was unheard of to me at this point. I had been making steady if not spectacular progress aca-demically in the last two to three years and had filled in much of my C R I S I S T I M E : Y E A R S 1 0 – 1 3 3 3 missed earlier schooling as well. But life was about to become a rough ride in the next five years, like a rollercoaster where we have just reached the top and are about to hurtle down. Social and academic pressures, plus fate and circumstance, all had their part to play in shaping the next crucial stage of my life-story. On 3 May 1981 I was 14 years old but only had two months or so left in lower school. Then it was the summer holidays, which I enjoyed with Po. In the autumn of 1981 I was sent to the upper school. My parents had decided to do this, even though Thame was a good 14 miles away from home, largely because of the continued support from the unit which was not available anywhere locally in High Wycombe at this time. And now I had to cope not only with my disability, but also with the pains of growing up and being a teenager. My strength as a person, my perseverance and my faith were about to be tested. 3 4 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E C H A P T E R 3 Teenage Turmoil Years 14 –18 L ong, long ago in a school far, far away, kids sat in groups, some anxiously looking over their course notes and discussing their forthcoming exams, while other more carefree pupils were talking about what was on at the cinema, or who was going to the school disco on Saturday night. One person in particular did not seem to be with any of the groups, but always seemed to be walking around on his own. Grasping his heavy schoolbag he looked a real oddity, was picked on and bullied continuously by most of the others, and was carrying a disability that few knew anything about – Autism. This was me of course. The school in question was the Upper School in Thame, and the time was autumn 1981 until June 1985. The intensity of my worries and feelings of isolation increased by what felt like hundreds of times over during these years. This was not due to just one reason, but a combination of several. The chief ones were: 1. The pressures of tests and exams that all pupils have to go through at this age. 2. The fact that my Autism and particular needs were not understood by most of the other pupils in the school, leaving me vulnerable to victimisation. 3. The distance of my house in High Wycombe from the school. Let us now examine each of these main factors in detail. First, exams are stressful to any student at the best of times, and even worse for someone with Autism, where any seemingly little worry can be magni-fied out of all proportion. I didn’t always worry about the things students would usually worry about. For example, with many of these exams, especially the morning ones, I would be more concerned about the possibility of oversleeping or missing the bus simply to arrive there than actually answering the questions. At this time they were still giving students the choice of CSE or O-level exams rather than the universal GCSE that was not brought in until 1988. While I had made good progress, I had been entered mainly for CSE exams on the basis of my missed schooling in earlier years and the thought that my Autism could hinder me from doing too well. I had other ideas though and set myself a target of a grade one in all five of the main subjects I was taking for my first public exams in 1983. This could be regarded as equivalent to five O-levels at this time, a good basic standard of edu-cation. I allowed myself only a single grade margin for slip-ups – four grade ones and one grade two would be just about acceptable, anything lower was unthinkable. Even this was on the condition I took more exams the following year to become more qualified. I liked being hard on myself! I was under constant mental pressure to perform well, otherwise I would look even more stupid than I already did to most of the others. While my stress levels soared, something interesting was happening to my mind games. Until recently I had only imagined fairly simple events in my make-believe world and not usually to do with advanced human activity, simply because I didn’t have the social understanding to consider them. But now for the first time I started simulating more recent events in the real world, those with complex operations and multi-plan purposes. Indeed during the turmoil of my CSE exams in 1983 I simulated events in the Second World War, a war that took great sacrifice, strength and careful strategic planning for this country 3 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E to be victorious. To win this conflict would mean me obtaining my target grades in the exams in real life. We can imagine the numerous fighter pilots, fighting to the last against all odds, and every time I got a practice revision question wrong, one more plane was lost to the enemy as a casualty of war in this parallel world. This imaginary conflict went on for several months between my mock exams and the real ones, and at the beginning the odds were not looking good for a victory. My exam technique was not yet perfected, mainly due to lack of experience in my trials, resulting in many a grade two instead of a grade one – so the enemy ‘had the upper hand’ in my mind. It was often necessary to work through a problem several times or to look at it from a different angle before really understanding it. Or I could break a seemingly very difficult problem down into a sequence of simpler ones and work through these one by one to achieve the main goal. This was where the multi-plan operation policy sprang to mind in my parallel world. It was through a combination of these revision techniques, and a lot of help from the resource unit’s staff and my parents, that all turned out as it did in real history – this country was victorious in the Second World War and I did meet my target, although only just, four ones and a two. But the fact that I had set myself a difficult target and achieved it in what was then the most advanced work I had ever dealt with was a fundamentally crucial success story, not just for that particular moment, but also giving me a firm foundation for more advanced work to come. In the next two years I took several more exams and did reasonably well, but not brilliantly in my view. I managed a grade A in O-level physics, but was disappointed when I only got a grade B in both O-and A-level Maths, my favourite subject. In the Advanced level I studied pure Maths and statistics, got nearly 100 per cent in two papers and then had a real off day with the third, mainly due to not organising my time well enough. It was still a victory for me in a moral sense, however, since my target grades were A or B, anything less constituting a failure. About the only exam I definitely failed was human biology, which had aspects of, wait for it, socialising in modern culture – thinking back I was not too surprised. I had started calling T E E N A G E T U R M O I L : Y E A R S 1 4 – 1 8 3 7 myself the nearly man, getting four grade one CSEs and one grade two CSE instead of five grade one CSEs, and then getting these B grades instead of As, as if always just missing out on perfection. We shall see in a later chapter that this fact comes into the equation again at a far higher level of work. Now the second factor – while my academic progress had been a struggle at times, at least it had a successful conclusion. On the other hand my reaction to most of the other pupils in the school was nothing short of disastrous. Youngsters of this age can be cruel and they will pick on anyone who looks or acts different. Groups of bullies called me every name under the sun, although stupid and thick were espe-cially frequent. This went on and on for years until I almost believed them, and felt the laughing-stock of the school. To get an idea of how miserable I felt, let us make another comparison. Suppose a man with a wooden leg is ordered to climb up a 50-rung ladder by himself. It takes him five hours to climb up to the forty-ninth rung, and then a nasty stranger comes and pushes him down to the ground again. Back up the poor man has to clamber, taking another five hours. Now imagine this occurring about five or six times over and this approaches the frustration and hurt that I felt. In a small handful of cases I was physically hit by the bullies. One particular incident stands out when a big boy started threatening me with a large bargepole – it seemed as if every time I went round a corner he was there. He said he was going to ‘get me’ and teach me a lesson. This petrified me and I couldn’t figure out what I had done to make him do this. It started affecting my health and I was losing sleep. Eventually, after what seemed like for ever but was probably only a couple of months, I managed to identify the boy to a member of staff. It turned out that he was attending the nearby young offenders institu-tion. Even though he largely ignored me after that, to this day I’m usually very nervous of physical violence, especially from strange or large burly men. I found myself retreating once more into my fantasy world to find a way of coping with all the stress; the army in this parallel world had been inventing all sorts of new devices to help me 3 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E cope in real life. Let’s look briefly at two such devices, and the reason behind their use. The first case would arise whenever a particular bully started teasing me or calling me names. I would try to ignore it and get away from the bully at the time (since I was afraid of physical attack) but when I got round the corner I would fall flat on the ground and pretend to faint. In my parallel world a whole group of bullies had just been struck down with a chemical weapon attack, meaning that they would never be able to tease me again. The second device was the instant grenade, similar in pattern to the above, but accompanied by me making an explosive sound as I fell to the ground. Sometimes I imagined that soldiers of my own were lost in this way in the conflict against the bullies, but then when I got home where I always felt much safer I thought of a general sheltered under armed guard. At home I used to shout out: ‘Bullies! You may be able to get the soldiers on the front line, but you’ll never get the higher ranks of military personnel in their protective bunkers, and therefore you can’t win!’ To summarise then, it helped me to think of events like these, which happened in minor conflicts all over the world, because where of course it was totally fictitious I felt I had a place to retreat to, a place of safety where I could restock things, muster up new strength and bravery and assess the best methods of protection from mental and physical abuse. We all have to find a way to get rid of our frustrations – buying a punchbag might help some! A further reason for falling down on purpose was to look unhappy, as if to say to the bully, ‘Well look, I’m so miserable already that if you can hurt me when I’m like this it won’t make much difference, will it?’ I felt the vast majority of the pupils at school failed to understand my various phobias and dis-ability, many with good reason as I expect few had ever heard of Autism. This is fair enough, but why couldn’t many of them just get on with their lives instead of being unkind to me? That’s all I would have hoped for. There were one or two students who did not tease me in my years spent here – I even had a crush on one girl in the year above me. She was rather clever academically and did well in her O-levels, including T E E N A G E T U R M O I L : Y E A R S 1 4 – 1 8 3 9 a top grade in her Maths. She was also of Scorpion star sign and very determined, but it was the fact that she appeared to be friendly and wanted to talk that made a big impression on me. After all, I was not used to people being nice. She came from a big family with about eight sisters but I can only remember one clearly. I believe this sister got a B in her O-level Maths and both sisters were in the same academic year. She then left school in December 1982 to work in a local supermarket where I used to try and make myself go to say hello, but was terribly nervous about it for fear of looking stupid – I felt as if I was walking the tightrope with no safety net! On the other hand I was so pleased at having found someone friendly that I thought it would help me socially if I was able to talk back. I also remember however that at one stage another boy warned me to stay away from this girl. The third main reason for my increasing feelings of isolation was the sheer distance of my home to the school. I was now commuting not just the ten miles or so to Chinnor but an extra four to Thame. This involved nearly an hour’s bus ride every day. On two or three occa-sions during my time at that school a disco was held, and I got very upset when I was asked to go and had to say no, simply because I lived too far away. Indeed when I told some of the students where I lived, either they had no idea where High Wycombe was or thought I was making the whole thing up. But the harsh truth of the matter is that even if I could have gone I would most probably have been unable to cope socially. As I’ve mentioned elsewhere, my idea of what to wear on its own was as unknown as modern technology is to a bushbaby. I could not really expect the other students to understand my disability, which was not very well known even among adults, but with every passing day I found myself sinking deeper into the midst of isolation. The actual time on the bus allowed this. Let us examine briefly why. Taking the journey from Thame back to High Wycombe (the trip from High Wycombe was similar in reverse), there were quite a few other school pupils at the beginning and most of these commuted to Chinnor, perhaps one or two at the top of Chinnor Hill, then usually for the remaining ten miles I was the only passenger. Sometimes the bus drove very quickly along this largely straight region of road with 4 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E its engine roaring loudly, when my whole body would shake while my heart beat faster. I was making a comparison with the bus engine sounding angry. This anger represented my frustration at feeling utterly alone in this bewildering world, not just with my disability, but also with being the one pupil who had to travel all this way, battling against the odds, like a single ant lost in the middle of the Sahara desert. The fact that the school I attended was the correct one academ-ically is not in question, since I would never have had the vital con-tinued support from the unit locally in High Wycombe, and socially would have been even worse locally, but nothing, absolutely nothing, could take away this intense feeling of being unique, so different from everyone else, and with every day the feelings intensified further. I can remember many other things about what happened to me socially in my school years – the things people said, many of their names, even the licence plate on one of their cars, will be deep in my memory and will remain there always. When and if I get to 70, when most of these people will have forgotten I even existed, I will still remember every single detail as accurately as if it were yesterday. But the critical fact remains that with all of them, even the girl I had a crush on, I never really knew them as individual people. My disability and the distance from school never allowed me to. Talking on the school bench was about as far as I got to making a friend. I had built things up in my mind out of all proportion, but this was very different from the real thing. Soon it will be time to move on, and we can’t dwell on events in the past that we have no control over. It is for this reason, and in the interests of the privacy of individual lives, that I will not be reproducing any more of these memories here, either with the bullies (who hopefully will have mended their ways) or with the kinder people. They all now have their own lives to live. My only wish is that they know (through reading this perhaps!) how I felt. I have stated already the crucial aspect of support from the trained staff at the Autistic unit throughout my school years. We shall see shortly just how crucial it was when I find myself in a situation without this support. I had only turned 18 about a month earlier when in June 1985 I finally left school with my A-level studies finished. I left T E E N A G E T U R M O I L : Y E A R S 1 4 – 1 8 4 1 behind the comfort of routine and faced the outside world for the first time. My next academic adventure started in September 1985 at the local High Wycombe college to study for what I thought would be a two-year computer course. At this time I was still not certain what type of job I eventually wanted and my family thought it a good idea to try this. After all, this was the time (mid-1980s) when computers were first becoming readily available to the home user, and this also was something of the future (nearly all jobs now and many then used com-puters in some form or another). It all started off well enough. I was excited about a new course and pleased to be far away from the Thame bullies that had haunted me for so many years. Who knows, I thought, I may even learn how to social-ise now in a place closer to home, and become more confident in that respect. I made a promise to myself on the first couple of days of term to try to talk to and make a real effort to get to know some of the other students. Indeed I did manage a few intelligent conversations. But two crucial facts had been overlooked, facts that were to become the cause of another of those terrible twists of fate which would ensure that I would never have the chance to finish this course. The first of these reasons was that the contents of the course had been misunderstood by all of us in the family. The work did indeed have some computing in it, but was not solely a computer learning process. Instead there were many other modules or elements associated with it. That is to say it was not so much concerned with the machine operation in itself, but the implications in modern society. I soon started running into difficulties with lots of these additional aspects of the course. One of the modules, for example, was under the heading ‘People and Communication’. And this is where the second crucial fact comes in. The staff at the college (which incidentally has now become a university in its own right) were never made aware of my condition and were treating me as any other student. Whereas in previous years I could always fall back on sympathetic help from the unit in times of high anxiety or pressure, now there was none. The staff here just thought I was being awkward, and not picking up the ideas presented perhaps because I wasn’t trying hard. With no sign of any 4 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E real help in sight, things quickly spiralled out of control. Then the teasing started. Just a little name calling at first. I tried to pretend it wasn’t happening. Then more and more. Things had become a nightmare again. I was hiding in the toilets. I was terrified of being hit. I was being called spastic, and all the time getting more and more worried about the work I couldn’t grasp. There seemed to be no one to ask for help. I had got into such a panic by this stage that even if they had tried to assist me with the work it would not have sunk in. My parents at first said: ‘You have always been a fighter in overcoming difficulties at school, so try to stick this course out too.’ But I felt utterly trapped, like a man stuck in one corner of a cage where in the other three corners a million ants are crawling towards him. On the day when one of the lecturers gave us a really difficult assignment, plus telling us that we had to decide within six weeks if we were going to stay the course because expensive fees would have to be paid after that, I wanted out. I knew in my heart that this wasn’t for me, and that the only way that I could ever be happy again was to break this vicious circle, and do something else where I would feel safe. This was the first and only time that I have ever quit a course before the finish, and I was only there about one month. But sometimes in life you just have to go on your own gut reaction. To find out how I broke the vicious circle, however, you’ll have to read the next chapter! T E E N A G E T U R M O I L : Y E A R S 1 4 – 1 8 4 3 C H A P T E R 4 The Working Life Years 18–21 I t was about the time when all my problems were occurring at Wycombe College that my parallel world had been perfecting a new weapon, never before used, in the fight against the bullies. Things were already reaching breaking point when one morning (on a clear and sunny day) in October 1985 a decision was made. But this time there were no mass air raids or soldier conflicts as in the Second World War. Instead a single, fairly small and innocent-looking plane took off from some hidden base deep in the heart of the USA. Its target was an imaginary production factory used for the manufacture and publication of various academic works, including books on computer courses. After a couple of hours’ flight the plane flew over the target and a single bomb was seen to fall, but for one, two and three seconds there seemed to be nothing wrong. Then on the fourth second after that bomb had dropped came a brilliant flash of light as bright as a second sun, and a blistering wave of heat filled the air. Then came the noise like a ‘bat out of hell’ from the blastwave travelling outwards in winds of over 200 mph. One minute later, all that remained of the factory, and of just about everything else within two square miles of ground zero, was a pile of ashes. A single surviving bird limped over the radioactive wasteland, desperately trying unsuccessfully to take off with its one remaining wing. The scene of desolation came suddenly, totally, and was absolute, beyond ordinary description. My make-believe world had just exploded its first nuclear bomb. And this computer work was caught in its deadly rays. I had always used events in my parallel world to evade the worry or responsibility of facing real happenings to me. But what factors had led me to picture a scene of such carnage, imagining a device 2000 times more powerful than any used before? Could it be a culmination of nearly 18 years of bullying and victimisation? Of isolation and mis-understanding of a perplexing social world? Or a feeling of being trapped in a no-win situation? Most probably a combination of these factors, mixed in with the effects of my Autism which can intensify greatly even the smallest worry. Whatever the reasons, in that instant I had decided to stop my computer course, and my feelings were so strong on this matter that I would not have returned to it for hundreds of years into the future if I lived that long. The only way of escaping my trap was sudden, overwhelming, absolute change, like an insect that had spent its whole life trapped inside a balloon which suddenly bursts. I had never experienced such a strong sensation of feeling before. The question now in my mind was just how much further my thoughts could wander under stress. We shall see in the next chapter where even the imagined occurrence above will look small compared with what is to come. But for the moment let us concentrate on real world happenings to me. In the roller-coaster ride of living with its ups and downs, I had certainly had more than my fair share of downs of late. But for the immediate future my luck was about to change for the better. It just so happened that my mother had a part-time job as a receptionist at a transport firm called Cavewood on the nearby Cressex Business Park. One day shortly after my college disaster she happened to mention me to one of the managers at the company, explaining how both she and my Dad were considerably concerned about what was best for me. Through this conversation I got invited T H E W O R K I N G L I F E : Y E A R S 1 8 – 2 1 4 5 for an interview for a job in the accounts department there. Let us review what the outcome was. It was on a Thursday in November 1985 that my interview took place. I was a bit apprehensive about it. I thought I might be sent away at once because of my Autism and the fact that my confidence was very low at this point. Nevertheless I managed not to show this. The first thing I got asked was when I had just met the interviewer on the stairway, before we had even got into her office. She asked, ‘What’s the weather like today?’ I gave an intelligent answer, saying something like, ‘It’s a bit cloudy and cold, but not too bad.’ From that moment on I started to relax a bit more. The lady seemed helpful and I found I could talk easier than I thought I would beforehand. I must have done all right because at the end of the interview she said, ‘If you like you can start on Monday.’ Of course I was thrilled at this instant, for I had found a worthwhile occupation at a time when I had no idea which direction my life was heading in. It was a job I was to hold on to full time for over three years. My new work had many positive aspects to it. For a start because Mum also worked in the same building she was able to give me a lift in every day (we both started at 9am). During the first few weeks she also gave me a ride home, but after this I walked home (about a 20-minute walk) through the industrial estate, since I worked until 5.30pm, while Mum finished at 1.30pm. This was a good routine each day (which is helpful if you have Autism!) and of course I was having the first taste of earning my own money. My job was based in the accounts department and I had various duties such as adding up and checking numerical totals on sets of invoices that of course involved figure work, which I liked. In addition, I was also getting the chance to relate to and get on with people in a working environment. Other duties included filing invoices, recording information in a record book, and preparing mail. During the duration of my work at Cavewood, I also developed a new interest. I had not been all that interested in playing sports, but had eagerly been glued to the TV each year watching the Wimbledon tennis championships. Then, one lovely sunny summer evening, after I had been watching I chanced to walk out into the garden and 4 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E suddenly had the thought, ‘What fun it must be to be able to wallop a tennis ball over a net and make a rally, and to have the challenge of competing with someone.’ Inspired by this idea, I asked my parents and we obtained some old tennis rackets and started knocking the ball to each other on the grass that very evening. A few weeks after this we went on holiday to Swanage where I had the chance to play on a proper tennis court for the first time. I was so nervous when I first stepped on court that my legs felt like jelly, because I was really keen to create a good impression. But my enthusiasm never dimmed, and after our holiday I started playing with my parents quite regularly several times a week in the local park, where I soon beat my Mum quite easily, although Dad took slightly longer to master. On the face of it then, at this time, my life was looking pretty good. I had a full-time paid job, had taken up tennis, and had the stability of my parents’ home to go back to each evening. Unfortunately, a number of crucial aspects had been overlooked. I might have matured in the sense that I was working, but had I matured as a person? And would I be able to keep my Autistic anxieties at bay? Sadly this proved not to be the case. One such worry involving my work I had had since only the second week there. And others started to form and build up in my mind. The first complication arose because of my work hours. For as well as working the five normal weekdays I was also required to work every second Saturday. However, the exact timing of this Saturday work was more subtle. It was up to the individual. If you started at 9am then you could go home at 12 noon. If you started at 8am then you could finish at 11am. I hated this uncertainty aspect that upset my whole routine in several ways. Let us examine these. First there was the human reaction of not liking an early rise on Saturday. I had always had a lie-in on this day until now. I had tried to make this the one day weekly without too much anxiety. Just two weeks into my job I was already worrying about this aspect ten times more than anything else. For the average person it would just be an inconvenience, but due to my Autism it started to affect my health and well-being. My immediate superior, who often helped me with my work duties, used to like going to work really early, sometimes before T H E W O R K I N G L I F E : Y E A R S 1 8 – 2 1 4 7 7am on a Saturday, so that he could then leave early. I did not. My boss kindly let me start work at 9.30am. This was a privilege and let me lie in a bit longer. But not long after, an even greater worry surfaced. Because I wasn’t starting work until 9.30am I had to stay until 12.30pm. Most and sometimes all the remaining people working in the accounts office on Saturday liked coming in and leaving much earlier. Often I was the last one to leave the office. This fact gave me untold misery. The last one to leave the office was supposed to be responsible for switching electrical machines and lights off, and checking doors and windows were secure. But there were hundreds of electrical switches and gadgets in this large office. I was petrified of not knowing which things to switch off and which to leave. My parents had always checked things like this in my home environment. At the time I could not handle this seemingly huge responsibility that had been put on me. What if I left something on and it overheated and destroyed the office? Or what if I turned off a computer that should have been left on and ‘lost’ thousands of records for the company? I was also worried about receiving an electric shock through touching switches that I didn’t understand. I had always had this fear ever since I was a little boy where I used to dream that the whole house was full of cables and if I trod on a single one I would get a shock. I decided after a few months that I would rather come in early and leave with the other people on Saturdays than face the checking on my own. But I still hated this. I used to worry from the moment I got up on Friday morning about the Saturday work, and used to force myself to get up sometimes as early as 5.30am on Saturday to go to and hence leave work early. I was never able to go out on Friday night, and felt so tired by Saturday lunchtime I didn’t feel like doing much else. I was also unable to distinguish between remarks and light humour, so that when a couple of my workmates teased me by saying ‘You have to come in to work every Saturday now’ I took their remarks literally, and ended up worrying even on the Saturdays I had off in case they had meant it, or there had been a change of dates by my boss. 4 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E I was also noticing other things when I walked home from work. On Mondays to Thursdays as I passed through the industrial estate there were always plenty of cars coming out from other companies on their way home. Yet on Fridays at the same time it always seemed as dead as a dodo. From the high windows of my workplace on the top floor one could look out and see the car parks of various other compa-nies. One could also see the main road out of the estate, with the car parks emptying and the vast majority of the estate workers trooping home at 4pm on a Friday. Some left even earlier (Airflow at 1pm). And there I was, stuck in the office until at least 5.30pm. It was difficult not to notice this each week, working right by the window. I used to combine my frustration of not being free (as I longed to be) early on a Friday with my anxiety about the Saturday working. I became obses-sive about the fact that Fridays would always be a bad day for me, full of worry. This obsession was to last many years, as we shall see, even after I left Cavewood, where its implications were to become more deep rooted (see next chapter). A further task which was causing me distress was in the mail prepa-ration. This would involve folding up large sets of invoices, putting them into envelopes, and then sealing and franking them under a machine to make them ready for the post collection each evening. There was a tight deadline to this, as the postman always came at the same time each day and did not like to be kept waiting. The office manager had told me that this job had to be finished on time, no matter what, and I took this very literally, as usual. If only he had said something like: ‘Just do your best, get as many letters done as you can, and what’s left can go tomorrow.’ But no! I built things up and up in my mind. I lost sleep over it. I used to stiffen up and get terrible neck-aches just with the worry. I used to get arm-aches as well when I tried to fold invoices up, sometimes many hundreds of them, in a hurry. On Fridays, there was always even more mail than usual, since once a week we sent out all foreign destination post in addition to the inland deliveries. A further factor was thus produced in making me worry more, and hate Fridays. T H E W O R K I N G L I F E : Y E A R S 1 8 – 2 1 4 9 It was not only the actual physical tasks at my work which gave cause for concern in this period of my life. I was also starting to have a medical problem with deteriorating eyesight. My vision had started to be very blurry, and this turned out to be serious, for I was required to have a cataract operation on both eyes. These were done separately, several months apart, and each time I was under general anaesthetic and had to stay in hospital for several days. The part of my eyes causing the blurring was removed, but I now had to wear very thick lens glasses all the time, for without these I was virtually blind. One of the operations was not totally successful, meaning I had to go back a third time for corrective laser treatment. I had to call on a lot of my inner strength and my parents’ support to get through these opera-tions. After a bit more time I was able to start using contact lenses, which did help me to see more normally, but I still had to go back for regular check-ups to make sure there was no further deterioration. A key year for our family turned out to be 1988 for a number of reasons. My sister, Po-Ling, had reached the age of 16 and was maturing very quickly, both socially and academically. She had done very well in her exams. The GCSE was in its first year and she had commented on being one of the guinea pigs in that students had found it very difficult to find notes or books to revise from since there were no past exam papers, etc. Nevertheless, Po was one of the best per-formers of her year, attaining many top grades from her school (a local one in High Wycombe). In sharp contrast, my deepening sense of anxiety and stress at work was starting to attract the attention of my Mum, who realised that things were not looking good. She concluded that I needed some additional help, but with the unit support now gone the question was where to get this aid. In desperation she con-tacted the local community team for people with learning disabilities. This was to be the start of my social services support in adult life. During these years, as well as playing tennis I was also playing table tennis since we had a table at home (although sadly I stopped playing later in my life because of worsening eyesight). The first time I ever saw a member of the social services was at my home, where I was introduced to her and straightaway challenged her to a game of table 5 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E tennis. This made me relax more in that I was doing something I enjoyed rather than just having to face the social aspect of talking. This lady was only seeing me for a short time, but after about two months I was assigned a full-time social worker whom I found very supportive and who stayed working for me for many years. I also started seeing a trained specialist in London, brilliant in her field and understanding of Autism. At least now my family had comfort in the knowledge that some support was present again, as it had been while I was in high school. It turned out that this support from social services was to become every bit as vital to me as the professional help I had from the Autistic unit. Things might have been difficult at times with my Autism, but over the next few years, for a time at least, they were about to become worse than my nightmares. I have little doubt that I would never have achieved my major academic or independent living successes that I have today if it wasn’t for the support of both of these establishments. Back in 1988, after some more anxious incidents at my workplace, including an occasion when I misunderstood a telephone call from Glasgow when someone with an accent tried in vain to tell me his name, I ended up hiding in the archives in tears. My ability to carry on with the job full time was now being debated by my parents, who had also made another observation that I was almost totally dependent on them. Upon reflection I realise they were right. Let us examine why. At this time my independent skills were virtually non-existent. Mum was cooking and giving me all my food each day (including my sausages and chips). She was doing all my washing and even putting new clothes on my bedroom chair to wear each week, since I had no concept of dress sense and why people dressed differently when they go to work, and when they go to a party, say, or socialise. My job was taking up a lot of my time and draining me of a lot of energy. I never went out meeting people socially unless it was with the family. This and the steady decline of my mental state made my parents decide that steps had to be taken to rectify this situation. I finally left my job at Cavewood at Christmas 1988, and did succeed in relaxing, at least over the holiday, being free from the long hours, the post and the other T H E W O R K I N G L I F E : Y E A R S 1 8 – 2 1 5 1 phobias there. All the same I still feel today it was a fine achievement, given my mental state then, to hold down a full-time job for over three years. At the beginning of 1989 I had started going to a disability learning centre in High Wycombe to learn more about independence and relating to people, but I did not stay there long. I remember one day when I went in the teacher handed out a piece of paper to the group and said the words ‘baby alphabet’. My first thought was: ‘What does she mean?’ Then it dawned on me. She wanted everyone to write down each letter of that alphabet. Here I was, having achieved numerous top grades in many academic subjects, and having experi-ence of A-level Maths, and the challenge for the day was to write the baby alphabet. Progress, I thought? Not for me. Not here. I literally walked out there and then, never to return, determined to do some-thing better with my life than to write 26 letters on a piece of paper! My Dad incidentally was still involved in the TV and video pro-duction industry after all this time, but was now working from home. He sadly got made redundant from his other job in mid-1986, but managed to set up his own home business. My sister had gone on to start A-level art (her strongest interest). But what of my future? We are about to enter the darkest period of my life-story, and yet also the proudest in that somehow I was able to survive a total nightmare situa-tion and turn my life into a success story – even in such detail as writing these thoughts down in a publication. The next two chapters of my book will be the hardest to write. Yet they could also be the most important because the happenings I experienced have fundamentally shaped my strength of character, and the framework of the rest of my adult life. I was still playing tennis and being inspired by several players at Wimbledon. Steffi Graf in particular had a determination and skill that left me in awe. She had already tried to win Wimbledon 1987 against the then undisputed all-time champion, Martina Navratilova, but been beaten. When in 1988 she again had to face this opponent in the final, few believed she would avoid being beaten again. But I had watched how she had improved her game over the year and I said to myself, 5 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E ‘This year she will do it.’ And that’s exactly what happened. In the best tennis match I have ever seen to this day, from a set and 0–2 down she produced an incredible run of inspired tennis to win the champion-ship – almost as if defeat was not an option, and that the seemingly impossible became the possible. The next two chapters of my life are about a time when some of my worst fears from my fantasy world became terrible reality. Yet I was able to find inspiration from the above and elsewhere to conquer all odds. T H E W O R K I N G L I F E : Y E A R S 1 8 – 2 1 5 3 C H A P T E R 5 Deepening Struggles Years 21–23 T his period of my life started off with the era of traffic surveys. Removed for the moment from the restrictions of the long hours working at Cavewood, I now eagerly raced onto the industrial estate virtually every weekday evening to watch people leaving work, making up for lost time with all those occasions when I wished to be outside and free while at work myself. Fridays were the prime day with the most traffic appearing between 4 and 5pm. Here is a typical rundown of what I would see on a Friday: 3.58pm About four or five cars would be driving into the estate. Most probably workers’ families or friends going to pick up the workers in a couple of minutes. No cars are seen leaving yet. 3.59pm Two more cars are seen going into the estate. Still none coming out. 4.00pm (exactly) There are no cars coming in either direc-tion. It seems strangely quiet, like the calm before the storm. However, a series of factory lights are seen to flicker off. Only a few seconds to go until people start leaving. 4.01pm Three cars are now seen to race out from the estate. The sound of other car engines starting up is heard. The show is about to begin. 4.02pm There are five more cars coming out now. A motor-bike appears from another road, and makes a loud noise on purpose. When it starts getting held up by the other cars, my body gets a tingling sensation all over in anticipation of what is next. 4.03pm Suddenly cars seem to emerge from almost every direction. Two more motorbikes then a large lorry arrive. Another rough-looking sports car arrives and starts revving angrily behind the lorry. 4.04pm The lorry driver has started to ask someone direc-tions and the sports car driver is not having it! With a tremendous skid, he races out in front of the lorry, just missing another car which hoots crossly. The sports car driver then hoots back. These two cars end up chasing one another out of the estate with more hooting and skids. With every skid my whole body shakes with excitement. 4.05pm The large lorry pulls out into the main road. Hundreds of cars are now appearing. What just a few moments ago was a free-flowing road now grinds to a halt right near where I’m standing. The whole estate seems to buzz with the weight of traffic. 4.06pm More and more cars – it’s hard to believe there could be so many. The road up ahead is still blocked, and now cars form a line further down the main exit route. Another skid is heard in the distance. D E E P E N I N G S T R U G G L E S : Y E A R S 2 1 – 2 3 5 5 4.07pm The whole of the main road is now static with traffic in both directions as far as my eyes can see. The entire estate seems to have become one great car park. 4.08pm Virtually the same as the previous minute. Still static cars everywhere. Two of these rev their engines, being stuck in the queue. One of the drivers is shouting out loudly to another driver. 4.09pm Still traffic everywhere. However, the traffic has started to move again very slowly. 4.10pm The traffic flow has now quickened to half normal pace. One more enormous skid from a car trying to emerge from a side turning. Again my whole body shakes. 4.11pm The speed of the traffic is quickly returning to normal. Three more cars emerge. One of them gives a long hoot for no apparent reason. Perhaps just for the sake of wild excitement of being free from work for a whole weekend. 4.12pm Only one last car is seen leaving the estate. Just as quickly as it all began, the traffic has dispersed. Until 4.15pm there would then be a brief gap in the cars, then another set would appear between 4.16pm and 4.22pm, and another load between 4.31pm and 4.40pm. There would be quite a few cars here, which had left with workers finishing shifts at 4.15pm and 4.30pm respectively, but never as many as at 4pm, and not enough to block up the main road. Nevertheless, there was still the occasional skid, rev or shout from this lot to keep me amused. By 5pm however, the rush hour was virtually over. At 5.02pm and 5.03pm a few lonely looking cars emerged from a couple of roads, seemingly from a skeleton crew, almost ashamed to be showing themselves in leaving so late from work on a Friday. But at 5.31pm when Cavewood finished – nothing 5 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E – not a single car could be seen. The only thing visible was a Cavewood lorry coming down the road. On the other weekdays, from Monday to Thursday I found that the above pattern was repeated, but everything happened one hour later, with the main volume of traffic leaving from 5pm. There were also other although smaller shifts of traffic leaving at 4.45pm and 5.15pm. But there was a deeper significance in my life-story to all this than just observing cars. For one might be wondering what drove me to do this each day, often standing out in the cold and rain for hours at a time. While this was going on, something interesting was happening in my thoughts. With every skid, rev or angry noise from these cars I imagined that it represented a release of my own frustration in life in being Autistic, a loner, and different from other people. Whenever I went home after the rush was over I always felt much calmer, as if most of that frustration was gone. I also made an association with these peak hours each evening as representing strength in such things as academic achievement (top grades in CSE or O-level exams). Earlier hours when people were still at work represented lower grades, as if to make a mockery of all those bullies in school who had called me stupid or spastic (since I had already achieved many top grades at this level in real life). Friday after-noons then represented Advanced level work (or even higher standard), for just as many of my bullies no doubt did not undertake Advanced level work as I did, so equally many of them would probably have to work late on a Friday and not be able to go home at 4pm. I became obsessed with being free at this time. I felt it belonged to me, and no matter how much I got bullied or teased through the rest of the week this period would be a safe haven where they couldn’t get at me, and I could block them out, or rise above them in the mind. Although I did watch the traffic on the other weekdays, it never raised such intense feelings as on the Fridays. Sometimes, of course, for practical reasons it wasn’t always possible to be on the estate every single evening, and on these occa-sions I started making car noises at home to mimic the rush hour, and always at the same time as on the real estate. This became as much of a D E E P E N I N G S T R U G G L E S : Y E A R S 2 1 – 2 3 5 7 habit as watching the cars themselves, and it got to the point where my parents used to go out on a Friday afternoon rather than stay in and listen to me making noises. The fact that I had more time on my hands probably didn’t help in this respect, although I was engaging in some part-time Maths coaching, and still playing my tennis and table tennis. My Maths work was involved with assisting a teacher with various pupils of GCSE standard in her class. I did get satisfaction in the knowledge that I was helping others, and at the same time my table tennis had become quite good. I actually played in the league for a while, winning over 80 per cent of my matches in one sporting year, but I felt that my life lacked direction. I had no full-time occupation in this period, and I was being sucked even deeper into my intense rituals and withdrawing into that parallel make-believe world of mine which conjured up the question, where were things heading? I had mimicked many real world events in my parallel world from giant roaming dinosaurs millions of years ago to the great ice ages of a few thousand years in the past. This in turn had led to primitive cave people, which then gave sway to more advanced cultures. We passed through the age of discovery and exploration in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to the Second World War. Then we witnessed the first Hiroshima-type atom bomb. In the real past, many scientists became extremely distressed about the demon of total destruction that they had brought into the world and called for its research to be halted. Their wishes were ignored and a nuclear arms race began. Sim-ilarly I too was now imagining modern weapons, ultimately the equiv-alent of a ‘million’ college bombs, as I sought a means of protection against possible scenarios too horrible to comprehend by many people. Let’s take a look at one such example of the sort of situation I was considering. Suppose that at some point in the future a nuclear war really happens in the real world. By a fluke you happen to be exploring a deep cave at the time, and so survive but everyone else perishes. When you emerge from your cave all you see are ruins. There are no supermarkets, public transport, postal service or telephones, and little or no food and drink – what there is is probably radioactive, resulting 5 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E in a slow and painful death. There is no chance of being rescued, or of seeing anyone alive again, ever. Only two or three rats nibbling your arm provide you with any company. This is what I mean by total panic. Panic so great it numbs every feeling in your body. It makes you walk in a daze, thinking that this must be a terrible nightmare that you will soon wake up from. Suppose you now find a very high bridge still standing above solid concrete. Would you decide to climb it, jump off and end things quickly? It might be the best way of proceeding. But how any rational person would react in a situation like this is unclear. Practically, in real life I asked myself, what could be the worst thing that could happen? The most important thing to me was my family. I was thinking particularly of my mother in 1989 who had to go into hospital for a few days for an operation for cancer. They appeared to have caught it early, and just two weeks later she appeared to be making a speedy recovery. My mother had been the creator of life for me. Her everlasting love had never dimmed. She had brought me up, cared for me, fought for me, and always believed in me and my abilities. It would be unthinkable to imagine a world without her. I once asked her ‘What on earth would I do without you?’, to which she replied ‘Probably die of unhappiness’. But why should I concern myself – for this will never happen while I’m young, will it? Life con-tinued as before for a few months, and my parents’ wish to help me become more independent led in 1990 to me attending a special hostel for young people with disabilities. At first I hated this place. Not only did I have to face living with other people with disabilities for the first time, but the staff were also challenging my ability to face things instead of being shielded from them at home. I had to perform various tasks on a rota basis with the others, such as hoovering, cleaning, washing up, shopping, and other household tasks. I found these in themselves quite difficult because I wasn’t used to them, but it was my relation to the other disabled people that really worried me. Sleeping at night was the worst time since I was often kept awake by loud TVs and chatting until the early hours of the morning. At times the others swore at me and I misinter-preted this as a risk of physical violence stemming back to my school D E E P E N I N G S T R U G G L E S : Y E A R S 2 1 – 2 3 5 9 days. One night I was so anxious I ran home (about two miles) to my Mum’s house at about 1.30 in the morning and burst into tears. And here I was, a grown man of 23. That’s what Autism can do under stress. Then suddenly my Mum was back in hospital again. The cancer had returned, more seriously than before. Throughout the rest of 1990 we saw her gradually get weaker and weaker, and look more and more ill. She had always been so strong, bubbly and full of life. But now she appeared to be losing the fight to survive. My Dad refused to consider the unthinkable and sought out the best doctors in the land to obtain the best possible treatment for her so that she could pull through. But on Boxing Day 1990 when she was again rushed back into hospital after spending Christmas Day with us, I had an over-whelming feeling that the inevitable end would soon come. I had to do something. I knew that her greatest concern for me was my well-being, and for me to be able to cope by myself. Just a few weeks into 1991, I got my chance to fulfil her wishes. It was in February 1991 that I moved out of the hostel for people with special needs and into my own rented accommodation for the first time. My social worker was considerably anxious about the prospect of me coping on my own, since I had never tried anything like this before. But I had been doing my homework. I may not have liked the hostel when I attended it, but it had a vital role to play. It had sown the seeds of knowledge of those vital independent skills neces-sary for running your own home. In addition, it was the thought of not having to relate to the other people at the hostel and the ability of running this new home as I wanted that really spurred me on and make me look forward to the challenge rather than finding it a daunting prospect. In this respect my experience at the hostel was a good one because it had really toughened me up for the unexpected. In a deeper sense I was on a mission to survive. As I visualised in my parallel world, a doomed society facing some catastrophe or apocalyp-tic happening in the near future has to do anything reasonably possible to ensure that at least a chosen few survive. My learning how to live largely on my own I mimicked as those chosen few, working 6 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E day and night in an underground nuclear-proof bunker, preparing for the worst, but still hoping it never happens. I was afraid of death. I am still afraid of death. Not only for my mother, but my Dad, the rest of my family, and myself too. I used to have a dream about an express train travelling through the Siberian wilderness one cold and foggy autumnal morning. The further this train travelled, the more autumn turned to winter along the trackside, the more leaves fell from the trees and the less time of my life I had left. Eventually it would turn to total winter, and everything would turn white. That was the point of death. I used to wake up screaming. But at least I was living. I was surviving in my own home, with minimal support. I wanted to fulfil my mother’s wishes – this was the only thing that mattered at this time. The rest of my family by this stage had already been told. There was not much time left. They dared not tell me. And yet, the few times my Mum had come back home to Dad’s house in these first few months of 1991 I did not recognise her as the Mum I had known for 23 years. She looked so ill, weak and feeble. And sometimes, when you have led a young life as difficult as mine, you can be blessed with extra insight. It is possible to know things even when they are not said, by the way people look and act. I knew I had to be ready. But so long as she was still with us, there was hope. Maybe she would pull through. Maybe they would invent a wonder cure there and then. Life had to go on. We had to think positively, that was the only way to keep going. I carried on with my tennis and table tennis. I carried on helping students with their GCSEs in the Maths class. My sister Po-Ling had gone on to do A-level art and was about to become a graphic designer. My Dad was still working from home, and I still saw him on occasions. My own home was in the Wycombe area about 15 minutes’ walk from town, or a short drive to my Dad’s home (about two miles). Yet nothing could overcome my feelings of approaching disaster. Then we are approaching my twenty-fourth birthday, on 3 May 1991, but I’m still 23 so far, I argued on the morning of this day. For I was not born until about 5pm. D E E P E N I N G S T R U G G L E S : Y E A R S 2 1 – 2 3 6 1 At about this time my mother had written a note for me on some pieces of paper. It was a very special moment for me, and one that I have often remembered when I have had to summon some of my inner strength, to overcome difficulties in life. The note read something like: ‘To my dearest son Marc, you have achieved so much in your short life, you have my inner strength now, and the invisible but powerful mother’s love that will watch over you and protect you in life. Keep trying, my darling, be brave, and always try your best, especially with the tennis. Keep this note in a safe place, but if ever you lose it don’t worry. Nothing can affect my infinite love for you. Mum.’ I really do believe that a lot of the strength of character I have today was through this love, care and understanding that my Mum and the rest of my family had shown me in all the previous years of my existence. The tennis being mentioned was nicely relevant since my parents had only recently given me a tennis trophy for supreme effort and hard work on the tennis court. By the time we had reached 3 May 1991 I had virtually mastered my independent living. My Mum had survived long enough to see this, but only just. As we shall see in the next chapter, for me and my parallel world of the imagination, the apocalypse was just three weeks away. 6 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E C H A P T E R 6 The Apocalypse and New Beginnings Years 24–26 T he date is Friday 17 May 1991. It’s about 3pm, and I was happily preparing to go out on one of my traffic surveys, having just arranged a tennis game with a friend for the following day. It was one of those isolated moments where I was living out of mind, forgetting the major troubles and problems of life. Another minute passed, and then my telephone rang. I picked it up, saying hello happily. I heard the word ‘Marc!’ This was surely my Dad’s voice. And yet there was a sense of urgency in that one word that I had never heard him use in quite that way before. I said ‘Dad?’ and waited in anticipation. There was silence for a few seconds. Then I heard the words that sent a shudder through every bone in my body: ‘I’m afraid Mum’s dying.’ A few minutes later my Dad had driven down to my house with Po-Ling and picked me up. We were driving to the London hospital where my Mum lay critically ill. It all seemed unreal. We went into the room where Mum was lying, barely conscious. I had never seen anyone look so pale. I can remember her saying, ‘I can’t go on any more.’ In that instant I thought back to the last few months and my newly learnt independence, and stepping nearer to her I replied, ‘But I can Mum, I know I can.’ To this my Mum said a resounding ‘Yes!’ and I knew that she knew that her dearest wish about me had come true. After that, despite the family saying a few more words, she seemed to lose consciousness altogether. Hours had passed while we sat there in a daze. When something so enormous is happening one loses all track of time. Eventually, late at night, my Dad ordered a taxi to take me home while he and Po remained by her bedside for most of the night as Mum still clung to life like a thread. Dad had promised to let me know when there was any news. There was nothing else any of us could do but wait. Our feeling of hopeless-ness was total. Back at home that night, my parallel world had descended into anarchy. There was looting and rioting and widespread panic every-where. Scores of overturned cars, broken glass and cries of panic. And a deep concern that these scuffles were the beginning of an imagined World War Three with mass weapons used on a large scale. After what seemed like for ever, morning broke. I knew I had to face the inevita-ble. I grabbed the phone, dialling my Dad’s number. I heard his voice of dread, ‘Hello,’ I said, ‘It’s Marc here – I think I know what to expect.’ And yet, Dad replied, ‘The simple fact is, she’s still holding on.’ He had been waiting for the hospital to call him with any news. He had not long been home and thought that my call was the hospital. Once more I had to sit down and wait. Once more my mind drifted into my make-believe fantasy world. A radio was playing music. Then the music stopped with the words: ‘We interrupt this programme for a statement from the Prime Minister. An enemy attack has been launched against this country. Three incoming missiles have been detected by the early warning system off Yorkshire. Stay in your homes. May God be with us.’ Three minutes had passed. I came back to reality with my tele-phone ringing again. I picked it up and once more heard Dad’s voice on the other end. I said ‘Is she dead yet?’ and Dad said, ‘Yes.’ My world of the imagination had reached its darkest hour. And so had my real one. It’s the closest I have ever felt to experiencing death. In my mind 6 4 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E on this fateful day, 18 May 1991, I imagined a country devastated by several hydrogen bombs with damage over a million times higher than anything before. The world turned dark for two years. Nuclear winter set in. This was my imagination – a place I could always go to in my mind seemingly for protection. But what protection? For all the agony, pain, numbness and disbelief that would be felt by countless millions in this imagined scenery had become terribly real feelings for me in the death of my mother. The experience changed me, and the way I look at things. Even I don’t understand fully how. It made me realise how fragile all human life is. It must be treasured, for we are truly in the hands of fate. And we must realise that everything happens for a purpose. And then, in the midst of all this destruction of my imagined world, right in the middle of the radioactive wasteland, a shining light was seen glowing brightly, a tiny beacon of life. It was the bunker that was set up to survive against the odds. It had remained intact. Civilisa-tion did have a chance after all. From this one humble refuge, society was rebuilt. Artificial intelligence and creativity became abundant. Cities were built, the like of which had never been seen before, all for the common good of humanity. This was the beginning of the modern era. Shops, libraries, cinemas, laboratories and places of research, every modern creation in the real world today, from the tallest sky-scraper to different religious beliefs, were mimicked in my imaginary one. This was a civilisation created for the good of all mankind, one in which no goal was for ever beyond reach. This was a society with the ability to survive, having witnessed the hands of death at close quarters, having been through the worst case scenario of fate, and yet lived to tell the tale. And at the heart of it all, protected by yards of solid concrete and guarded as thoroughly as Fort Knox, is the Presidential Palace, a vast construction consisting of a collection of large buildings, with 12 chambers, each to work for the common good. I’ve often dreamt of this place and can always remember my words to my mother on that fateful last day of her life that I could carry on and cope with life. I now had a responsibility to carry out that task. It helped me to make T H E A P O C A L Y P S E A N D N E W B E G I N N I N G S : Y E A R S 2 4 – 2 6 6 5 different decisions in real life by pretending I was a leader in this palace and my friends were my advisers. If I made a good decision the country would prosper. If I made a mistake the country would struggle. Protests and strikes would occur – the politics of a modern era. For the first time I was facing up to the responsibility of my actions, although still with the aid of an imagined parallel. What of the chambers of my construction? They contained all the detailed knowledge, both academically and socially, that I had gained and learnt through my experiences to date in real life from the outside world and my loving parents and family. They are divided into differ-ent categories. Here are just a few. Chamber of Academic Research It is here that the solutions of complex academic problems are found, and a plan of action is set up to approach far-reaching goals on passing exams on all levels of work, from primary school tasks to postgraduate degree assignments. It also asserts the best way to teach others new academic skills. This will vary with the particular student concerned, the syllabus being followed in their course, and the level of the course. For it is only by effective communication to the learner that justified and worthwhile teaching can become reality. Chamber of Human Rights This chamber ensures that we respect the privacy of individual lives. For example, any non-Autistic person may wish to have nothing to do with Autistic people. I may not like this! However, it is that person’s right, and I must respect this. It is often necessary to take a gamble, so to speak, on saying ‘hello’ or making first contact to enable oneself to develop socially. However, the recognition and ability to respect people’s boundaries must have a higher priority than our social wishes alone, for only by doing this can our society be organised and civil. One might for instance see a friend once a week, but not more (since 6 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E they have other commitments). Or if they are particularly busy, or going through a stressful time, give them some space. Chamber of Security This department assesses the degree of risk of every possible situation that an individual can find himself in, from a large, vicious looking dog running up to you to a gang of bullies making threats. It is not the general chamber’s policy to conjure up unnecessary methods of revenge or of getting back at the bullies – at the highest level one must learn to forgive. Rather, in all but the most extreme cases, methods will be sought to defuse or avert the situation; for example, walk another way where the dog or bullies don’t hang around. It is not just the obvious physical risks we can take in life but our mental state needs to be kept stable. For example, if one is threatened with homelessness the stress involved in moving could affect both of the above factors. One must consider the options and make the best decision possible for ensuring one’s overall well-being. Chamber of Time and Organisation This chamber ensures that a person’s life is structured enough for him to be able to plan ahead, set up meetings, organise journeys and travel arrangements, and also to keep accurate records of necessary docu-ments or financial details within easy access. In order to be able to work together as a team, any group of workers or even social friends must have these skills to avoid society disintegrating into a disorga-nised mess. We also need the ability to be able to make snap decisions such as ‘I’ve just missed the bus, but I can get the train instead and still make my meeting’; or ‘My friend is stranded in the country with a broken car. Go and fetch her now, and leave the office work until after-wards since it has a lower priority.’ T H E A P O C A L Y P S E A N D N E W B E G I N N I N G S : Y E A R S 2 4 – 2 6 6 7 Chamber of Law and Judgement Containing the highest courtroom in the land, this chamber is built on the saying ‘Don’t judge a book by its cover’. It recognises the impor-tant fact that a person’s character, intelligence and kind-heartedness are more important than appearances alone, and in particular that people with disabilities should not have restrictions based on their ability to do things. Every individual has the power of the human mind, and there are no limits practically to this. The chamber will also assess every situation with friends on a legal aspect, and will not permit activities which are clearly harmful or illegal, such as joining in with a group of people taking drugs just to be ‘part of the gang’. This rule will be strictly enforced not only for the individual person’s pro-tection, but also for the sake of the others who hopefully need to recognise their wrongdoing, although in the end the latter has to be their decision. Armed with my new-found inner strength, I had now decided not just to carry out my promise to Mum of coping with living independently, but to exceed it. I set off on a mission, a bold and far-reaching mission with international class goals; a mission in two parts, the latter of which I am still attempting to carry out to this day. And this was a mission undertaken not just for myself, or the rest of the family, but for every other person on the planet who was ever labelled under the name of Autism. The two parts of the goal were as follows: 1. To achieve excellence. To prove to myself and the rest of the world that there are no limitations on what is achievable by Autistic people. 2. To spread the awareness and understanding of Autism across the general population, ultimately on a global scale. To transform the lives of thousands of affected ones, their families and friends, for the better as a result. To help others work for the common good. 6 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E Let us now take a look at each of these parts in detail, starting with part one. There were two main reasons for this part. First, I felt that I needed to prove to myself that I could set myself a really difficult task and be able to complete it successfully. This would, if done correctly, both improve my self-esteem and silence those memories once and for all of those bullies years earlier calling me stupid, since I would have con-vinced myself that I wasn’t. Many of the requirements of attempting part two of my mission would be very difficult to meet if not carried out in a positive frame of mind. Think and act positively and it will spread; think negatively and others around you can appear to do likewise. The other reason for wanting to achieve excellence was to be noticed and taken seriously by a largely disbelieving world about the abilities of Autistic people. There has to be a certain amount of respect for an individual to make others want to listen to what he or she has to say. The next thing was to decide how to go about achieving this academic excellence. Clearly, the standard of work achieved had to be extremely high, even for a non-Autistic person. Otherwise it might never get noticed or generate any interest in the first place! And it would have to be in a subject I felt good at. The logical choice was Maths. I had been able to count into the thousands since I was very young, had achieved reasonable grades at O- and A-level, and was now working through more advanced problems. In the long weeks and months while my Mum was ill, I had found one hobby in the evenings to take my mind off things – and it wasn’t going out to the local disco! Instead I would open my large S-level Maths book and sit there for hour after hour solving problems. The S stands for special and the work was slightly above A-level. The satisfaction of being able to solve these gave me as much a good feeling afterwards as a normal youngster after a good night at that disco. Both my Dad and my uncle from the States while he was visiting had noticed me on occasions working away, and had commented on whether I should put all this work to good use by applying for a course at university. My bookwork had helped me bridge the gap between T H E A P O C A L Y P S E A N D N E W B E G I N N I N G S : Y E A R S 2 4 – 2 6 6 9 A-level and first-year undergraduate work, but my condition of dis-ability needed to be taken into account as well. With the vital support of my social worker and the social services, in 1992 we managed to set up meetings at the University of Reading and the Brunel University (in Uxbridge). These two universities were about the only ones within practical transporting distance from home, where I planned to be based if accepted. The uncertainty and change of routine involved with living on campus seemed too daunting to me at this time. After I had demonstrated some of my Maths skills, I was accepted for a place at both on merit of my ability, but obviously had to choose just one. It was Brunel I chose. Sometimes one just gets an instant feeling about a place. As soon as I saw it I knew there was something special about it. I just felt it was going to be the stage of a key part of my adult life. My course was to start just a few months away, in September 1993. Now one of my dreams was about to come true. This was the ultimate paradox I thought for someone who used to be the laughing-stock of the school because he was so stupid, as they put it. I now had a chance to go and study with the best academic minds in the land as part of attempting to achieve an ambitious mission for the good of all Autism. Unlike the computer course drama, the university staff were made aware right from the start about my disability, although apart from what we told them they would have to find out for themselves when I was there! The second part of my overall mission has a much further reaching ambition, since it could change the lives of countless others as well as my own, for the better if successful. Part of this could only be done after I had established myself a little with some academic success, but other parts could be worked on straightaway; in particular my experi-ences of Autism were already known since I was living with it. The first step here was to find a way to get a large number of people to listen to my experiences. One obvious method was to make public speeches. My first big chance came in 1992 where I gave a talk for the National Autistic Society AGM. I divided my speech into three differ-ent sections to provide variety for the audience. First, I explained what it was like to live with Autism, explaining my feelings by way of 7 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E examples and comparisons of events in everyday life of an average person. Second, I ran through key events in my own life-story. Finally, I generalised the situation and discussed how other Autistic people and their families can make progress. It was almost like a shortened version of this book! The speech lasted about 40 minutes, but then I took nearly as long again answering questions from the audience. Making a speech in front of hundreds of people can be nerve racking at the start if you are not used to it. Like the beginning of an exam, you can feel vulnerable, knowing that your ability to cope could come under scrutiny. The more you give talks, however, the more con-fident you get. Certainly that first time when I stood up next to the microphone in front of these people it hit me: ‘Oh no! What am I doing here? I’m not going to get any help now but will have to perform all by myself.’ I can remember forcing myself to keep talking fluently, and thinking that this was part of my mission to help others. By the time I had got halfway through my talk I was already starting to feel better. And when I got to answering the questions I felt quite relaxed and thought I’d managed to do quite a good job. Talking in public is of course not the only way to attract the atten-tion of large numbers of people. There are other even more impacting methods. One of these is to appear on local or even national TV. Another is to have work on Autism published. All of these things were to come true, but they would have to wait until the next major period of my life had already started. We are fast approaching my twenty-sixth birthday, and before I knew it there was only the summer holiday left before my experiences at university were to begin. I started sorting out my financial situation with my social worker and sorting out my grant (yes they still had these then!). I also spent quite a few hours looking at travel arrangements and bus timetables. There was about a 15-minute walk from my house to the bus stop, up to 45 minutes on the bus to Uxbridge, and then another 20-minute walk (or second bus) up to campus, so it was going to be quite a long day. The final thing to do, then, before the great adventure began was to decide what the target result of my BSc in Maths was going to be. For the first time instead of grades A to E or one to five I was T H E A P O C A L Y P S E A N D N E W B E G I N N I N G S : Y E A R S 2 4 – 2 6 7 1 confronted with first, second or third class honours, the second class being divided into upper and lower divisions. Now there are many people who would actually be quite happy with an upper second class honours. But I wanted to be a perfectionist. I had set myself a goal of international standards to achieve academic excellence. There could be only one favourable result, and it wasn’t an upper second or anything lower! I did however allow myself a one-level margin for error – should disaster strike (if I was ill for my exams, for instance) and I slipped to a 2:1. I would accept this on condition that I either took another BSc to reach the required first or, better still, take a more advanced degree. Until I had managed one of these, the first part of my mission would not be complete. So now we are all set. Just a few years previously I was almost convinced I would struggle to do well at O-level Maths after I underperformed in the mock exam. Now what was then only a dream was about to come true. The next two chapters will reveal how this was to unfold. 7 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E C H A P T E R 7 University Life I Undergraduate Study O riginally operating as a college of advanced technology, Brunel officially became a university in its own right in 1966, while the Uxbridge campus where I was to attend became fully established in 1971 after its original location in Acton. It can be regarded as a smaller, yet more cosy place of research than some other universities such as Oxford. This had the advantage that once I had settled in, everything I needed for my work such as libraries and computer rooms were close at hand. My course was a direct BSc in Maths which was split down into various modules representing different areas of mathematical study, such as modelling, statistics and numerical analysis, but with a fairly even distribution of workload on each module. This was in contrast to many other BSc degrees being offered such as BSc in Maths and statistics and a BSc in Maths and computing, which had a significant part of their course away from the so-called ‘pure’ Maths theory which had always been my keenest interest. The university used the American-style semester system consisting of two longer terms per academic year in contrast to the traditional three shorter terms. The first semester lasts from September until January while the second goes from February until June, and each of these semesters consists of six ‘modules’ of study. At the end of each semester there is a two-week period of examinations, which for me was by far the most important period of having my work assessed. Most of my modules were marked 100 per cent on the exam at the end, and even those that had a coursework element only represented 20 per cent of the total marks. This was not true of many other degrees that had a higher content of coursework assessment. In addition, many students took an extra year of their BSc to go on a work place-ment. This was a useful thing to do provided you had a rough idea of the sort of job field you wished to embark on. I had elected not to do this, and embarked on a full-time, three-year course without work placement. There were basically two reasons why I chose the course without work placement. First, I enjoyed the stable timetable of a rigid struc-ture to my day, which working elsewhere would have broken and brought extra problems such as travelling times increasing and having to relate to strangers in the workplace. I probably would have dwelt on these and my work concentration ability could have suffered. The other reason is that while there are many job applications for graduates who have specialised in, say, computing, there are in fact very few jobs other than teaching that are linked with the pure mathematician. I knew I enjoyed teaching, but I was unsure where my life would lead and what form it might take after I left university. For the time being, all that mattered was that I was there, attempting to realise my dream in a place of academic excellence, and my greatest adventure was just starting. My course then would consist of six semesters on three levels (one level per year, each more challenging) with success required on each level before attempting the next one. In my first year at university my grades turned out to be like a dream come true as well, even by my high target levels. I ended up winning the year prize jointly with two other pupils for being one of the best three grade achievers, obtaining ten grade As and two grade Bs in my twelve modules of study. Even the two grade Bs only missed As by a couple of per cent. My hours spent at home in my study the year before, working out ‘Maths problems’ for fun, were really helping me here for I had already done a lot of the background reading that 7 4 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E was necessary for many other students. I had to be able to make critical decisions on the management and organisation of a large amount of work of a high standard. For example, I might have had a statistics course assignment to finish, but also a mathematical modelling task with a deadline of submission before the statistics; thus I would con-centrate on the modelling first. If I had numerical method notes to revise, I could have a look at these on the bus going home. We can imagine how in my parallel world all the strength and know-how on time management and academic knowledge from the various chambers of ‘head base’ were required at a high level of inten-sity to cope with the demands of my course. We can picture a conflict where we are attempting to work out the right tactics to win, not with Second World War planes any more, but with sophisticated modern jet aircraft, racing across the countryside at more than the speed of sound. Fields, towns, villages, a church and some mountains all race under-neath us and are gone in just a few seconds. The ‘stupid boy’ from school (as the bullies had put it) now felt as far above those tormentors with his grades as comparing the speed of a jet aircraft to a tow-truck. And this was only the first year of a first degree. There would be many more adventures in the next two years, but there are two or three more important happenings in the first year that should on no account be left unmentioned. The first point to note is that in each semester of my first year there was one module on computing – the general idea was that the rest of the course was going to demand at least a fundamental knowledge on how to operate them, and how to prepare and debug source code (computer programs). Now while the average student would probably expect to try to distribute the workload evenly among the modules, I found I was spending up to 80 per cent of my time on the computer ones, simply because unlike the rest of the Maths I had little previous experience. I used to get hopelessly bogged down on totally trivial things such as if I didn’t know how to get a printout of my work, rather than the actual assignment. These were the only two modules of study in my first year where I did not feel well up on knowledge, but I U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I : U N D E R G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 7 5 had come to grips with them since all modules in the first year of my course were compulsory. There was also the fact that I had to log on (connect to the shared network) and log off afterwards from the university computers. I used to worry considerably that I would forget to log off for some reason. It was one of the university’s essential rules that on paper should never be broken, since otherwise other people could access your files. I would then conjure up worst-case scenarios such as: ‘What if someone did access my files, and sent a command to the print office for hundreds of pages of printout for which the cost would be charged to me, possibly hundreds of pounds which I wouldn’t be able to pay?’ Once the computer I was working on crashed while the lecturer had gone out of the room. I then sat there for hours in front of the screen, instead of seeking help, because I was so worried about disobeying the crucial rule and leaving the computer logged on. Of course sometimes my old worries about getting an electric shock surfaced, particularly when switching the machine on and off. As for the exams themselves in my first year, there was really only one main problem and it wasn’t with answering any of the questions! After all, my grade results had shown that. No, for me the biggest chal-lenge came at the end of the exam where each time you were given some thread which you had to feed through a hole in your paperwork and tie all your sheets of paper together so that they didn’t get lost or separated. And could I do this properly? I could not! I lost sleep over it! I got aches and pains all over my body with the stress of worrying about it. I folded the papers the wrong way and couldn’t get the thread through the hole. Then I panicked that perhaps I hadn’t done it right, that all my work would get lost and I would get a zero mark in the exam. Once in desperation I asked one of the invigilators if he could help me tie the papers up. He said ‘No!’, thinking I was just making a fuss. He then remarked, ‘If I started to tie exam papers up for every student I would be here all day!’ Point taken, but I think he should have realised that I had a disability and wasn’t an average student. I also worried that I would forget to write my name on my exam paper. 7 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E In time I devised a system which helped me to combat some of these worries and would write down on a separate piece of paper the date and the fact that I had logged out of this computer or I had put my name on this exam paper. While being rather cumbersome, it was effective in reducing my anxiety. I had also started interacting with some of the other students in my classes, making one best friend and two or three other friendly people I talked to. The ‘best’ friend was also doing a three-year course and most of her modules were also the same as mine. We ended up giving each other support with academic problems as well as emotionally cheering up after exchanging good advice. Of course there were many things I did not do socially – I still wasn’t going out to discos or playing table tennis (even though there wasaclubatuniversityforthis).Withallmy work and travelling in every day there didn’t seem to be time, but the point is that even the amount of communication I was engaging in here was a hundred times better than at any other educational establishment I had attended previously. After the end of my first year at university, my Dad and I went on holiday to Swanage to let off steam and celebrate my great achieve-ments so far, all now in eager anticipation to see if my good perfor-mances could continue for the rest of the course. And yet…sometimes in the rises and falls of life the falls can come just as quickly and as unexpectedly as the rises. In the latter two years of my BSc my perfor-mance was going to be affected by a cruel twist of fate, one that was totally unexpected. It all started when we returned home from that holiday, with my Dad parking his car on my road and me saying, ‘I’ll just run up to my house and unlock the door, Dad, then I’ll come back and help you with the suitcases.’ I had some trouble with the front-door key getting in, almost as if it had been forced. I thought ‘That’s odd’, but then innocently stepped inside. A few seconds later I was running back down the path shouting, ‘Dad, come quickly. I think I’ve been burgled!’ We both stared at my house in shock. The TV and video recorder had gone. There were drawers left open with clothes hanging out of most of them. Bits of paper and rubbish lay everywhere. My house had always been a fairly pleasant one – but it was on the ground floor even U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I : U N D E R G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 7 7 though there was an upstairs as well. It was also secluded round the back of the house and fairly easy to break in for a determined burglar. But we had never really thought about the possibility in any great detail. After all, surely this was the sort of occurrence that we would only read about in the papers? But now it had happened to me. Despite this, I just about got over it this time. After all, it’s a situation that perhaps many people find themselves in when they return from being away on holiday. Obviously someone must have observed there being no lights on during that period. Now that I was back I’d have the lights on again, so they’d notice that too if they came looking at my house again. And surely when they’d been once they would know the house would be more carefully guarded and so wouldn’t bother coming back again, would they? Now we are in the autumn of 1994, just a few weeks into the start of my second university year. The nights are drawing in for the approaching winter and I was often staying quite late at the university to finish assignments and work tasks before returning home late in the evening. It was when I came home on one of these dark evenings that it happened for a second time. This time my front door was wide open. The TV and video recorder (that had been replaced from last time) had gone once more. And once again there was mess and clothes all about the house. The burglars had struck again. On this occasion I never really got over it. When they came before I had been away on holiday – that was more understandable. But now they had struck while I was living there. What if they came again and I saw or bumped into them? I was also at university now, with assignments and approaching exams to worry about, not on holiday like before. Now began a period of active anxiety as once again my phobias quickly built up. I started mistrusting nearly everyone I saw, to the point that whenever I saw anyone in the street I would think, ‘Is he the culprit?’, ‘Is he the one responsible for invading my own private living space?’ But most of all it was the fear of potential violence or getting hurt by the burglars if they came back while I was in the house that gave me so many sleepless nights. What if they brought guns or knives with them? What if they kidnapped me? In all my experiences to date my 7 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E home had been the one place of safety, a location of refuge away from the bullies and dangers of the outside world where I could rest and gather new strength for the challenges of life that lay ahead. Now this one safe haven was having its security undermined. Perhaps in my parallel world the enemy had scored a major victory or had gained access to one of those top secret bunkers via a spy and had uncovered many of my own highly classified set of plans for protection on out-witting the bully. In the few weeks following this incident coming home every day was a nightmare. Each time I thought I would once again see the door forced open, or the window smashed and my possessions gone, or worse maybe see the villains still in there. Twice the burglars struck in nearby houses. I could only then feel for those people as I knew what they had been through. Then in another premonition I saw the culprits returning again. I felt it in my bones. ‘All things come in threes,’ I thought. No matter how much my friends tried to convince me otherwise, I just knew they would return. My work had suffered and I had performed terribly by my standards, only achieving a 2:1 overall in my third semester, with only 2 As. This was despite the fact that many of my modules were now optional and there were no more modules taken that concentrated only on computing and source code preparation. This takes us to 1995 where some great and bad things happened. Although the overall plan in my mission in life was to achieve academic excellence first, and then help others by spreading the awareness of Autism later, there was nothing to say that I couldn’t mix the two a little, and I had two great chances to do this early in 1995. The first of these was in giving another talk on Autism and what I had done so far. This was at the International Conference in Leeds, the biggest meeting ever held at that time in this country of Autistic spe-cialists and professors from around the world. Several hundred people attended. But soon after this I got an even better chance to spread the awareness of Autism around the country, with an audience not just of hundreds but of thousands or even millions, by appearing on national TV. I did this by being filmed for the BBC1 programme QED where I U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I : U N D E R G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 7 9 featured with another younger Autistic person. Let us briefly review the filming they did of me. In order to show a true reflection of my full life-style it was neces-sary for the camera crew to film me in various locations, and I had to fit this time in with my studies, but it was well worth it for my chance of fame! One such location was at my local tennis court playing tennis with one of my best friends (participating in the sport I loved). Another place they went was the local launderette to show me taking my washing there. At this time I had a washing machine at home but didn’t want to use it in case it went wrong or flooded – another Autistic worry that the programme highlighted. A third place where I was filmed was at the local train station – at this time I had just mastered a long-running phobia about train travelling on my own. This stemmed from an incident when I was much younger and was on a train with the family but we could not get the (old-fashioned) pull handle train door open and missed our stop. I had built up an anxiety that if this happened when I was on my own, or I got off at the wrong station anyway or got lost, I would not be able to cope. But the programme showed how I got to grips with the problem out of practi-cality because I really wanted to – it was up to an hour quicker than travelling by bus all the way to university at Brunel. Among other highlights, I was filmed at a special coffee shop I had found in Thame where I had started to go and eat my sausages and chips. The shop was unique in several ways; for instance I hate smoking, even the sight of it. I think it’s one of the ultimate evil products trapping millions of innocent victims with its deadly addic-tive chemical effects. The Thame coffee shop is the only place I know which is totally non-smoking and serves the food I really like – and all day long too. I can have my meal at 9am, at lunchtime, or 4.30pm. It’s also very user friendly. I shall be reviewing Thame again more thor-oughly in Chapter 9. The programme makers also filmed me at Brunel with my supervisor, who was choosing modules with me for the fol-lowing year. Yet even while the filming was going on, things suddenly took a turn for the worse again, as I returned home after one session with the crew to find the burglars had returned for a third time. 8 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E I realised, after suffering the agony of this third intrusion to my private domain, that I was never really going to feel safe here again and decided to move house. With the help of the social services we soon found another rented flat really close to the town centre and just five minutes’ walk from the bus station. In addition, this was part of a block of flats with a security entrance system and it was on the top floor, making it more secure. I soon moved and found that this started to help me with nearly every aspect of everyday living. Every little thing such as going to the dentist or having my hair cut was now only five minutes down the road, and this was especially useful given that I can’t drive. It also made it easier to get to the university by being so close to the bus station, and it gave me more time to do other things in my spare time. I had joined Wycombe Lawn Tennis Club nearby to improve my tennis and meet new people, for an example. At the end of my second year at university, the fourth (spring) semester had given me a further five A grades and one C (shock horror – what was a C grade?). My overall marks for the year were lower than the previous 12 months, and I was close on the borderline between a 2:1 and a first. I suspect that all the disturbances and moving house (which is stressful enough for anyone, let alone an Autistic person) had taken their toll. My best friend at university also had a few difficulties academically but managed to achieve a similar overall mark. Then it was the summer holidays again, and before I knew it I was starting the last year of my BSc in Maths. Was this the academic year when I and my university friend were going to realise our dreams of that first? Alas, for me at least, my age-old nemesis of being the ‘nearly man’ was about to haunt me again. Like playing in a tennis tournament and winning every round until you get to the final, and then losing at the final hurdle. There were only eight modules of normal study in the final year, compared to the usual twelve previously. The rest of the work had to be done working on a compulsory individual project that all students had to undertake. This was a substantial piece of work done under the supervision of an individual supervisor. I found my project generally harder than the rigid structure of the more conventionally taught U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I : U N D E R G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 8 1 modules since it was largely up to me to organise timing and layout of the work, and my Autism had always made this hard for me. Indeed it seemed a pity that my Autistic tendencies distracted me from what was otherwise an interesting investigation. The main topic reviewed was a study of continued fractions (a special type of fraction in which the numerator and denominator are themselves split into fractions) and how these are used to provide rational approximations to irrational numbers such as π and e. It can be proved that every rational number can be expressed as a finite continued fraction. Continued fractions have a number of other uses such as solving differential equations and deducing results of chaos theory and dynamical systems. For the latter, quite a bit of computer work was involved in my project for a review to be possible, which again tested my coming to terms with my electrical fears. Overall I achieved 62 per cent for the project, while the average mark for all my other modules of the year was about 66 per cent. That meant an overall average of only 64 per cent for the year, but remember I had done rather better the previous year – 71 per cent – which would count towards my final result. Sadly, not well enough! There I was, with an overall course mark just missing out – a few per cent short of the 70 per cent needed for a first class honours. And I was feeling like that runner-up in the tennis tournament. If my goal had been just to put in a ‘good’ perfor-mance then I could have stopped my academic mission here. But the task was not yet done for me. Graduation day came. I realised I did have a lot to be pleased about. It still seemed like a dream just being dressed in the gown and mortar board. After all a 2:1 wasn’t all that bad! Loads of people just wish for any sort of degree, so I didn’t want to be too greedy. Looking back, with my ability at the time (good but not total) I think the result was a fair reflection on my skills. My best friend had overtaken me (and nearly everyone else!) and got a first. And she deserves every bit of it! I’m very proud of her. She worked harder in that final year than I had ever known her work before. I also knew two or three other students that tried very hard and I think deserved more but only received 2:2 degrees. I was in the middle. Just one of the things you have to accept? 8 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E Not for me it wasn’t! The reader should know me better by now. I had set out to achieve academic excellence on an international level. I had not yet achieved this in my mind. Even as the graduation ceremony occurred I was thinking, ‘But one day, I will be champion!’ I had begun to realise just how good some people are at university. I was literally humbled by some of them and this had brought me down to earth with a bump in the last three years. I now knew that international standards were so high that, iron-ically, even if I had got a first class honours it would no longer be enough for my goal. I vowed to learn from my experiences and build on them. I felt that my Autistic phobias, and perhaps a little bit of inex-perience of degree-level exams, had resulted in me not performing quite as well as I could have done. For, I thought, a true champion in tennis is one who can pick himself up after a long hard match having narrowly lost, learn from his mistakes, and use the experience gained to become a better player. In a similar vein, if I could now show that my goal was reachable after thinking it wasn’t, then it would be that much more satisfying. I had now set a new goal, one never before considered, or possible. If I achieved it, I would be satisfied for life that any academic target, and any level course, no matter how long it took, would be attainable. I would reach what I had never been able to do before – reach fulfilment that I had taken on and beaten all odds to achieve what I wanted. I would get a postgraduate degree in Maths. I would have an award that would shatter for ever the myth that there are restrictions on what Autistic people can do. And even as the graduation ceremony ended for my BSc, I started to celebrate, not for the award just given, but because I had done well enough in it to have earned access to my post-graduate degree, to start at Brunel in September 1996. I had laid the foundations that had provided the key to me being able to start my final ultimate academic dream, and to realise the first part of my overall mission in life. My university life had so far spanned three years, and yet in reality it was less than half over. The BSc was not the end, but only the start. To continue this epic adventure we must move to Chapter 8. U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I : U N D E R G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 8 3 C H A P T E R 8 University Life II Postgraduate Study W e have reached the elite of education. There are two usual routes to a higher degree. The first way is by a taught course leading to an award such as an MSc (Master of Science degree). The second route, and the way I was to attempt the task, was by a degree by research. This work leads to awards such as a Master’s or Doctor of Philosophy degree. Before we embark on this far-reaching goal, let us reflect a moment and consider the various levels of academic work which we have so far encountered in this book. In order to clarify the situation let us make a comparison between various stages of exam success to that of an inspired tennis hopeful who is for ever striving for increased success on the tennis court. When we are in a primary school education our tennis hopeful is only just picking up his racket and being introduced to the game. Later as we approach school leaving age and exams are coped with for the first time, our player has joined a club and much improved his game. By the time we reach the standard of an A grade at O-level (GCSE nowadays), our player has become a ‘top class’ club player in their division one. A bit further on, where A-levels are being undertaken, our tennis hopeful would have started playing county and even (for the top A-level grades) some regional tournaments, as his experience and confidence in the game increase. This may be as far as our academic wishes take us, but suppose we were able to proceed further. In the lower results of a first degree (say a BSc) at university, our player is participating in national tournaments. As we approach the higher marks, our tennis hopeful has finally earned the right to play in the qualifying tournament for Wimbledon. Achieving a first class honours of our first degree would be the winning of this qualifying tournament and earning a right to partici-pate and play at Wimbledon – the ultimate world stage for a tennis player. Perhaps in the context of things I had ‘lost’ in the final round of qualifying with my high 2:1, but still got into the championships as a lucky loser because one of the other players pulled out. In any case I felt I had now earned that right. And every aspect of a postgraduate research degree, from preliminary background research reading to preparing and organising a thesis, to understanding the oral exam, could if successful be compared with success at various stages through the championships (such as the fourth round and quarter finals). To finally get the award would be like winning the championships. If I could do this I would be totally content with the first part of my twofold mission in life. It was in September 1996 when I started my course, a Master of Philosophy degree which researched special mathematical symmetric properties in the plane. The work was related to certain fields of Hamiltonian and quantum mechanics. The fact that I was undertaking this research by staying on at Brunel was a great advantage for me in that I was already used to the surroundings and where everything was. In addition, in the first year of my Master’s I still saw many of the people who had studied on my BSc course – these were the people who had gone on work placement so were doing their final a year later than me. In many other respects, however, I found working at post-graduate level very different from undergraduate work. There were basically three parts to completing my degree. First, there were several months of background research and reading, plus working through problems (mainly on paper) at this stage, for which the starting point of the course only demanded the knowledge U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I I : P O S T G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 8 5 acquired from the undergraduate course. Ultimately it would require skills and information at a much higher and more intense level. The second part would undoubtedly be the longest; namely to plan out and then type up a fully worded thesis (which turned out to be nearly 150 pages). Last, in order to pass the course I would then have to undertake an oral exam where I would stand up in front of a panel of examiners (specialists in the field of work I had covered) and describe in detail what the thesis was all about. This exam would only take half a day, but it can be the most daunting part of the course. Finally, if any typing errors or unspotted mistakes had been seen in my thesis by the examiners (who had each been given a copy), then even if I had passed the oral I would still have to correct these and submit a final copy of the work to gain the degree officially. I quite enjoyed the first year of this course, working largely on paper, but after this things got much harder. First, unlike the BSc work there was no rigid timetable or routine, but it was more subtle and it was also very lonely at times. After summer 1997 most of the under-graduates I had known left the university and I was largely working on my own (apart from regular meetings with my supervisor). I missed the other students, not only for social company, but also because we had often helped one another in solving difficult academic problems and assignments. The BSc work had been at a fairly high level but covering a broad range of topics in Maths. However, postgraduate tasks specialise in one tiny area of Maths much more intensely, and if you get stuck it is difficult to ask for help because there are very few other students also specialising in your subject. As so often in the past when I had been less than totally happy, other Autistic phobias were starting to raise their ugly heads, espe-cially when I started work on the computers to write up my thesis. Now the undergraduate pupils had used the computer centre machines. These were in open-planned rooms where you could just walk in and out. But there were far fewer postgraduates, and these few had a privilege – their own private computer room guarded by a locked door with a ‘punch code’ security system. In order to gain access it was necessary to press in a secret code (revealed to the 8 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E students) rather like a pin code for a bank machine. This was a ‘privi-lege’ that became a bit of a nightmare for me as my Autistic worries took hold. I was petrified of using this room and would regularly wait in a long queue to use the undergraduate computers instead. Some-times my supervisor had to wait with me when he wanted to work with me! Good thing he was understanding. Several worries had built up about this room. The biggest one was that I would leave the room one day with other students still in there, and lock them inside by mistake. What if they starved, or couldn’t get out? What if I was left locked in there and kept screaming for help after the university staff had gone home for the day? Alternatively, what if I left the room but forgot to shut the door (it was a hard and fast rule that you always should), thus letting in all the undergraduates, or even a thief, who would wreck the room and all its equipment? I would feel so responsible I would probably never forgive myself. Not one of these things actually happened. Yet I was so worked up with the ‘what if ’ possibility that even when my supervisor went in there to get printouts of my work I used to stand outside the room and wait for him to bring them out to me. Anything to evade the responsibility of being in there; to avoid the possibility of making a terrible mistake, and feeling guilty about it for ever more. The Autistic phobia involving people being stuck was not confined to university but had occurred on several occasions in my adult life. At my Dad’s house he used to have a shed, in the garden. If we had the family over or my sister, and people in the shed, I used to go and check it two or three times later that day just to make sure no one was still in there, locked inside. Perhaps the cat had run in without us noticing. Yet this anxiety was not so noticeable when I was a child. Maybe because then I did not have to face responsibility in the same way. Or perhaps it was a worry I built up for fear of making a mistake and looking stupid, which had always been a major one. But it was not only the actual university work that was getting hard. In October 1997, fate was to intervene from an external source to make things even harder for me. The landlord of my ideally located flat in High U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I I : P O S T G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 8 7 Wycombe town centre now needed it back (for personal reasons). This meant all the trauma of moving house again. At first I thought I would be all right as there appeared to be another flat to rent right next door in the same block of flats – moving in would simply be like moving my things into another room. It seemed too good to be true and it was! At the last moment this fell through and the place was no longer available. The only other location I could afford was about a mile from town, beyond the top of Amersham Hill. I had no choice but to move there. I hated the total change to my routine. Probably anyone would, but it was even more acute with me and my Autism, and I still had a fixation with time. Every little thing, such as popping to the hairdresser’s or the library, had become half an hour’s walk instead of five minutes. Have you ever tried walking up Amersham Hill in the pouring rain with five heavy bags of shopping? It’s endless! At least there was a fairly regular bus service and the bus stop was right outside. But since when have buses been dependable? The process of moving also made it harder to get in to Brunel for my studies. Previously I had only had one main bus route to worry about into Uxbridge. Now I had to time this bus with the ones going down Amersham Hill. Even a two-minute delay in the first bus would mean me missing the Uxbridge bus and waiting another hour. And the same on the way home too. Almost an extra hour just to get into High Wycombe and back home again. There was also another factor involv-ing my health to consider. Either as a result of the stress of this move, or from increased computer use, or more probably a combination of these things, my eyesight became an issue with a deterioration in my ability to wear contact lenses for an extended period. What was hap-pening was that my eyes were not getting enough oxygen at night with the lenses in. I found it very difficult to take them out myself at this stage, but if I wore the lenses for too long the eyes would become red and inflamed. I started going for more regular check-ups of my eyes with an excellent local specialist. I often had to go for long periods, sometimes weeks at a time, without wearing contact lenses in either eye. This left 8 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E me very visually impaired – I was almost blind without special glasses with lenses so thick I looked like Godzilla (at least I thought so!). Sometimes they would mist up or I would get drops of rain on them and then would really struggle to see at all. My university work seemed endless. It seemed to be taking even longer to edit my thesis and weed out all the mistakes than actually writing the main thing in the first place. I couldn’t see it ending. Life had become very depress-ing. And the demands of postgraduate work were pushing me to the limit! Yet even at this bleakest moment I knew deep down that I would rather spend the rest of my life trying rather than fail the course. Without that I could not proceed to the second part of my mission and thus could not fulfil my quest in life. Failure was not an option. It never had been at any lower level of academic work. I had never failed com-pletely on a Maths mission and I wasn’t about to start now! From April 1998 things took a turn for the better. I was again asked by my landlord to move house, but this time I was not very sorry as I never really liked the home up Amersham Hill anyway. My next home was going to be the best yet; one of a block of flats close to Wycombe Hospital, this place was only three minutes from town and the bus station. I had all my freedom back again, and even more besides. After over six months of change I appreciated this even more. Now at last I had come within sight of finishing my thesis, of having it in a good enough form to submit to the examiners. I had made some new friends in the university bookshop who were always there to talk to, comfort me and give me helpful advice both academically and socially. I just missed out on finishing my work in time for the gradua-tion ceremony in 1998 (they are only held once a year) because I still had a few more months to go, but later in the year (about November) a date was finally set for my oral exam. In a World Cup competition comparison, this was now sudden death in the knockout phases. There are no separate grades of attainment at this level, just pass or fail. During the few weeks preceding this exam I undertook numerous ‘mock’ presentations with my supervisor and was able to clear up many remaining grey areas on exactly what I needed to know here. Consequently, when it actually came to the real thing I was surprised at U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I I : P O S T G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 8 9 how easily I was able to keep talking. I talked for about half an hour and used a projector to display various slides. Indeed I was probably more worried about plugging in the machine and how to put the slides the right way up than actually giving my talk! The examiners then asked me a few additional questions and I think I managed to answer them reasonably well. Then they asked me to wait outside for a few moments while they decided what the outcome would be, this being a normal occurrence for research degrees. After about five minutes my supervisor (who attended the exam) emerged along with my back-up supervisor (it is usual to be assigned two although you normally see just one in the main part). I had passed the hardest part of my course! Returning for an instant to our tennis player comparison, we still had not completed the task fully but things were looking good for a victory after winning the semi-final of Wimbledon defeating the defending champion! In real times I had passed my oral exam and would pass the course overall provided I corrected a few errors that were still present in my thesis (mainly minor mistakes). The corrected thesis was then to be submitted by the deadline in a further few weeks. My back-up supervisor said, ‘Well done – are you going out to cele-brate tonight?’ I did not feel like celebrating! I had learnt from my BSc about the dangers of rejoicing too soon. I just wanted to get the job finished and was already thinking about correcting those mistakes. In just two weeks my supervisor was saying, ‘Just one more meeting for us.’ The next two days seemed to take ages, then that meeting had arrived. We had corrected the last of the noticed mistakes. I said, ‘Is that really it – am I free?’ My supervisors said, ‘Yes!’ It was in this instant that my academic dream really did come true! When Steffi Graf won her first Wimbledon title in 1988, the last rally of that match had the tennis ball hovering for a second on top of the net as if fate was deciding – is it meant to be? It was, and a split second later the ball fell into the opponent’s half of the court. I will always remember that match as the one that inspired me the most, and right now I was as happy as Steffi was at winning the title. I felt truly satis-fied, and like a champion! There were also tears of relief. I had worked 9 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E so long and hard for it – six years at university, having to cope with numerous setbacks, the disappointment of my BSc result, the break-ins and moving house, and always my Autistic phobias. This was now Christmas 1998, one of the happiest I had that decade. It then took about another two months to recover from it all and taking it a bit easy for a while to relieve all the stress. Then it was time for reflection. I had just achieved a qualification that meant more to me than having a grade A in O-level Maths for every second of a long sunny summer afternoon, and felt I could try anything academically. How about a doctorate in Maths from Oxford? That would look rather impressive. On the other hand, I thought, I could spend another six years getting this, and then someone else could come along more qualified with a higher doctorate (rest assured such things exist!). One could go on for ever. What about three or four degrees or two ‘Master’s’ etc.? Maybe that would be the equivalent of winning Wimbledon several times like Pete Sampras instead of just once. But I also had to reckon on the stress, the amount of energy it took out of me, and the fact that my overall mission in life had two parts, the latter being to help others to realise their dreams too. I needed more time to accomplish this. I can always remember one of the cooks where I had my food at Brunel at lunchtime (sausages and chips, of course!). She was a very kind lady who was concerned about my health while under the stress of my exams. One day towards the end of my Master’s, she had said to me, ‘You’re only young once! Enjoy it now while you can!’ It suddenly dawned on me that I could spend virtually my whole life studying. If I did this however I would not have enough time for the second part of my life mission. I also felt I needed to try to socialise a bit more and to travel. I was stale from all the exam stress of the last few years and decided that this was the time to start to concentrate on that second task of spreading the awareness about Autism to others and helping others to work for the common good. We will soon embark upon my adventures in life up to the present day, a world of helping students (in both Maths as a teacher and Autism), in having work published and performing speeches about my U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I I : P O S T G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 9 1 condition in talks all over the country. But before we leave university life, two more things: first, its happiest moment – the final graduation ceremony; second, a pause for reflection on what this period really meant to me. It was in July 1999 that I was once again dressed up in my gown and mortarboard. I invited some friends to attend the cele-brations, and this time I felt true contentment that I had reached my academic goal. I thought back to that fateful day of 18 May 1991. Surely Mum would be proud of me now if she could have been here. I could now say that I had completed all my Maths missions undefeated – it was time to move on to something else. University has given me nearly all the academic confidence I have today. In a way the success of this first part of my mission was just as important as the second. We cannot have one without the other, since a firm positive background of achievement in at least something is necessary to provide a platform to help others to do the same. It may have pushed me to the limit on occasions, and meant many hours in the study instead of going out, but for my own sake it is still the biggest period of achievement to date. On the other hand I had not had much time for other activities such as table tennis or social events at the uni-versity – there just weren’t enough hours in the day! Sadly, due to the deterioration of my eyes and the fact that I can only see clearly out of one eye at a time (due to swapping my contact lenses over), I now have to be content with outdoor tennis in which I have slightly longer to see the ball approaching. This defect in vision can considerably inhibit my performance at table tennis. And that was it. When you have got used to a certain way of life for some years, especially when studying which takes up so much of your time, it can be a huge contrast when that is suddenly gone. As well as various new skills, I was learning about teaching others. I was also about to find out that learning to be confident socially was going to be more tricky than any Maths exam, not just because it seemed a million times harder, but because it formed a fundamental obstacle in the nature of my disability. I had already beaten the odds academically, but could I now overcome my disabilities’ effects on other aspects of everyday living? Well, it turned out that with some I could, and some 9 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E of these successes felt every bit as real and as significant as those grad-uation parties. Yet other aspects have proven too much (at least so far) for me to conquer, with some of these ending in tears. Let us now move forward in time just a couple of months to September 1999. This will be the next key stage of my life-story – and all will be revealed in Chapter 9. U N I V E R S I T Y L I F E I I : P O S T G R A D U A T E S T U D Y 9 3 C H A P T E R 9 Years 31 to the Present Day W e begin this chapter with another ‘high-level’ talk I gave about my disability, this time at Christ Church in Oxford. Even if I decided not to do a doctorate there, at least I had the chance to see some of the sights of this prestigious city and at the same time continue with my ‘helping others’ quest. The conference itself was a massive, three-day event running from 17 to 19 September 1999, under the title ‘The Search for Coherence from the Fragments of Autism’, and included specialised speakers from as far away as Tokyo and Jerusalem. My own allocated speech period was on the Friday morning soon after the opening of the event, and I was very pleased to hear afterwards how many of the other speakers referred to some of the things that I had said. Performing a large talk in front of hundreds is like acting – you always feel a bit nervous at the start, but once you get into it you feel better. And the more you do them the easier they become. As well as previous experience helping in giving a speech, I have always found it helps to think back to my postgraduate oral talk in front of those examiners. Considering the many years of work at stake if I had messed up that one, then giving a public Autism talk never seems quite as bad. In most modern events I have been over similar topics so often in the past that a lot of detail is now memorised, and only occasionally do I have to refer to my set of notes. I actually prefer the bigger events, for they have a special feeling about them as if I am participating on the world stage, rather like playing on the centre court at Wimbledon! Mostly the audiences have been very receptive, although in some of the smaller events I’ve had some odd things happen, like one person falling asleep and another bursting out laughing in the middle of my speech because of this. Obviously I am not making speeches all the time, and I have started a number of new activities to fill my days. One of the key ones in terms of work was that I started to help some of the people from the Autistic unit next to the Upper School in Thame. I had already done some teaching on various levels both before and during university (where I helped some foundation students in a class to bridge the gap between A-level and first degree work in Maths during my Master’s course), and now I wished to do more. One of the first things you will learn about teaching is exactly how much you don’t know, or have for-gotten, since the students always seem to ask you about these topics! But there’s a lot more knowledge than just ‘knowing the subject’ that was required for me to teach effectively. Communication, and achieving this effectively, is the vital key. No matter how many degrees or doctorates someone has, if he can’t com-municate his skills effectively to the learner, he can’t be a teacher. Just because I knew the subject didn’t mean that they did. Sometimes it feels like trying to tell someone to go and write an essay in French when they know nothing of the language. In a way, teaching the Autistic children in Thame (the Autistic unit here was set up after my schooldays) was rather harder than students without the disability, since communication with them was that bit more difficult. Often it was quite hard just to keep their attention. On the other hand, working here was better than before because I felt in a safe environ-ment with staff who totally understood me. This brings us to another interesting point. I have also had numerous requests from students for help I have been unable to give, simply because I didn’t have a safe environment in which to teach them. Let’s examine why. Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 9 5 My lack of social experience and confidence, my fear of the unknown and physical harm, plus my overriding anxiety about people taking advantage of me due to my vulnerability, was affecting me to such an extent that I was not able to go to a student’s house, for example, in order to help them. My list of worries was endless. What if they had a big dog that attacked me? What if I had to ask them for a lift home because I can’t drive and they or their family ended up kidnap-ping me? What if they hated me in secret and gave me a drugged drink or poisoned food? What if their partner or husband got the wrong idea and thought I wanted more than just helping them with their Maths, and promptly smashed my face in to teach me a lesson? This incredible feeling of mistrust used to be present with nearly everyone outside my immediate family, even with people I knew quite well. And on occasions I still feel like this with people I don’t know well. Finding people hard to trust has also meant lost opportunities, socially as well as workwise. Often when I have met someone who appears nice and friendly, or if I can see they need help, I’m filled with a strong desire to help them and make them happy – after all, what else are friends for? But then I hesitate or pull back from the opportunity because of my apprehension of the unknown, and having to trust someone. This makes me very sad on occasions and makes me wish intensely to be without Autism. It’s almost as if I’m looking out of a long dark tunnel at the rest of the world and every time I try to get close to someone near the entrance I’m magically pulled further back into the tunnel. I used to go up to the local graveyard where my Mum was buried, and sometimes cried my heart out up there for hours on end because I felt so isolated. Another factor that has stopped me making further progress is a fear that I will somehow invade people’s privacy without meaning to, or that they will get the wrong idea on my intentions. For instance, the type of socialising I would wish for would be to trust someone enough to go for walks, visit the cinema, play tennis with them, maybe go on a shopping trip in London, but not involve myself with a more romantic and serious relationship, or get married. I am not yet ready for these things, indeed I may never be. One thing seems certain, however. 9 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E Unless I am given the chance to master many of the social skills needed to maintain successful ‘basics’ friendships I will never be able to make progress or break the cycle of my Autistic phobias of finding it hard to trust others. Consequently it is these basic skills that I hope to work on in the foreseeable future. There have been a few success stories socially to date. While working in Thame I had started going more frequently into the Coffee House restaurant, which I mentioned earlier. Not only was the food top quality, but you were always guaranteed a friendly service. I started feeling very comfortable in there and was able to talk quite fluently to most of the staff. Many of the younger ladies who worked there (espe-cially at the weekends) attended my school in Thame and I had the chance to help some of them with their Maths, as well as telling them some great jokes (well that’s a matter of opinion!). These were chances to interact with people that I would never get in High Wycombe’s food places. There were also several other shops in Thame that gave friendly service, including a paper shop called the Chocolate Box, and one of the few places to sell fruit polos (I don’t like any other kind) as well as delicious chocolate frogs. Most of the restaurants in High Wycombe are totally unsuitable for me, as few sell sausages and chips, and even those that do have very complicated rules on when you can eat them. In one place, for example, you have to have the sausages before 10.30am, otherwise they’ve run out and don’t sell ‘breakfast’ things after this time. You can’t have chips before 12 noon because that’s when they serve the lunches, but you can’t have them after 2pm either because then they’re selling afternoon snacks. It’s so involved. I’ve often had to go in twice in one day when I couldn’t get to Thame just to eat my usual meal. In sharp contrast, the Thame coffee shop serves me my full meal at any time in the day, from 8.30am until just before 5pm. There are other factors too which put me off places in Wycombe. There is the fact that most of the food is not nearly as tasty. Most of the takeaway places put so much salt on their chips they taste horrible, or don’t even provide you with a proper fork. And Wycombe is a less friendly or cosy place Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 9 7 than Thame. Instead it’s more like London. People serve you, and that’s it. I hardly ever get a chance to chat. The biggest factor though, apart from decent hours and no social opportunities for a friendly service, which puts me off eating in Wycombe is the chain smokers, who soon get to work each day, lighting up their precious fags often before they’ve had anything to eat or drink. Mind you, if other people wish to use a product with several thousand poisonous chemicals in it, then it is their choice because of their freedom of choice of individual lives. However, it’s an invasion of my privacy if I have to start breathing the stuff in as well! Consequently I will go to almost any lengths to get to that coffee shop in Thame to savour the thought of a lovely meal in a clean, comfort-able, fresh air environment. Not just in the week when I’m working nearby, but at weekends and Sundays as well. Sundays in particular are where the fun really starts, when there is virtually no public transport at all. Let us look at how long a trip to Thame from High Wycombe could take on a Sunday or public holiday. First, there is no direct bus whatsoever, so first you have to go to either Aylesbury or Oxford and then catch the bus in from there. I don’t often catch the first bus into Aylesbury, but suppose I did, I would leave High Wycombe at 9.45am and arrive in Aylesbury about 10.30am. But then I’m stuck in Aylesbury for over an hour until 11.40am when one of the few Sunday or holiday buses runs into Thame. I then would arrive in Thame about 12.10pm. The whole morning has gone, and I haven’t even eaten yet! Suppose now I do go and eat my meal – the sausages and chips sure are delicious here. I emerge from the coffee shop at 12.50pm having just missed a bus going back to Aylesbury by about five minutes. The next bus back to Aylesbury is about a quarter to three! It’s going to be a long wait! And when I finally get back to Aylesbury at about 3.15pm I’m then stuck again till 3.45pm for the next bus back to High Wycombe. Psssh! On such a day, even if every condition is ideal, every single bus runs exactly on time, and I catch the first morning bus out, I won’t get back into High Wycombe again until nearly 4.40pm! 9 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E More recently I have discovered a slightly quicker way to get to Thame, but it still takes about five hours. It involves getting the train into Haddenham, but unless I can time this with the bus it’s then a long walk (about two and a half miles) into Thame along a busy road with no footpath. There I would often be, walking in the snow or torrential rain, dodging the juggernauts splashing water all over me from the puddles, my umbrella breaking in the gale force winds (I’ve got through about 15 umbrellas to date!). All this for my beloved sausages and chips! And don’t forget I then had to walk back again. These are the sort of conditions that I am willing to go through to meet and socialise with my friends and eat in a nice smoke-free environment. I feel as strongly about this as I did about achieving all those postgradu-ate targets! Once I set my mind on it, I’m not stopping until I get to that food! The reader might now be wondering can’t I just eat something else, or eat at home. Let us examine each of these. I have usually had very little desire to try other kinds of food, feeling satisfied with the one that I have. After all, in parallel world comparison terms, if your country is prosperous and its population is well fed and content with good food policies, then why change it? You could also argue that I have not had many opportunities to try other things, or be talked into this, because the simple process of going out for a meal with a friend has been virtually non-existent and I’ve only had myself to decide what to have. I also generally don’t like less solid kinds of food as mentioned in Chapter 1. Meanwhile, one factor for me not eating at home is the fear of a house fire from doing something like leaving the cooker on by mistake. This deep-set anxiety of a fire usually surfaces at night, for when I’m asleep I’m not conscious and hence feel that I’m not in control. The biggest reason though for not staying at home is that of isolation and not meeting anyone. I’ve had enough of that all my life and if I stay in to do cooking and then miss one of the few buses out then I’m not going anywhere. Regarding the smoking issue, it’s the people I care for that hurt me the most to see them smoking, coughing and not feeling well, because I know what damage they are doing to themselves, even if they don’t. Like someone who is stuck in quicksand, the more they smoke and Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 9 9 struggle thinking they are dependent on the weed, the further they reach the point of no return of being an addict for life. My only advice is to pull themselves out of the sand before they reach that point. When I gave up sleeping pills (after my school exams), I halved the amount I had each time to make it easier for the body to adjust. The feeling of apparent well-being and of stress being relieved by a ciga-rette is an illusion. To disbelievers I would say this: suppose you had a man who can see all right but only from one eye. A magician appears and gives him a choice. He will give you good sight in both eyes for two years, but after that you will be totally blind (short-term content-ment, then the resulting illness associated with a smoker), or he will reduce your sight in your one eye by a half for three months, but from then on your sight will be good in both eyes for the rest of your life (body withdrawal symptoms, then recovery for smoker giving up). About the only exception to my lack of social success in High Wycombe had been in a local sweet shop which was run by a lady and her sister. These two people were very kind and got to know me quite well. I was able to sit in their shop when it wasn’t too busy and have intelligent social conversations. In addition many of their friends also visited the shop which gave me more chance to meet people. I used to sing a special song with the first lady every time I went in, and she was also able to comfort me when I was bullied, like the time when some boys were throwing stones at me. It almost felt I had found another sister who was there to give me extra advice. Po-Ling had now moved to Australia, having found a nice job and companion, but of course this meant that apart from the occasional visit to England I hardly ever see her. The sweet shop had been there for several years, but it was only in 1999 that I had started socialising properly with these friends. Sadly for me this was only to last for a few months, because by the end of 1999 because of family commitments (in London) my two friends had to close their shop trading in High Wycombe and move to London. Of course, when they left all the other people who had been visiting the shop, many of them on a daily basis, had to stop doing so. Quite a few of these individuals I was just getting to know. Once more the loneliness returned, for at least most of these people would have 1 0 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E had other places or friends to go and visit. But for me, apart from my tennis club, this was really the only place where I had felt fairly com-fortable and had made progress socially. The shop in Wycombe now stood dark and empty, and I tried not to look in when I walked past – it was too painful remembering all the happy times I had had just a short while in the past. Then one evening, about three months after my friends had shut up their business, I chanced to walk past their shop again. At that precise moment I got a strong feeling (perhaps one of my premoni-tions) that something was about to happen. Don’t ask me why, but I did, and for some reason this time I did look in the shop. I saw a figure moving, and then another one. Incredibly it was one of my friends from London (and one of her friends) who unknown to me had popped back to High Wycombe for a few days to sort out some things in the shop. They had just been about to go out for the evening, and had I been just a couple of minutes later walking past their shop I never would have seen them. In a few more moments they had let me into the shop. I was chatting away and singing the song just like old times as if they had never left. But only for a few days. Then it was back to London again for my main friend. After the celebrations at the start of the year 2000 had died down (and my fear of the end of the world prophecy had been proved wrong!), I started wishing more and more to socialise but was not really getting any opportunities. My two shop friends had moved to London. I would never be able to get there on my own, would I? It would involve catching the underground (and changing underground lines), as well as travelling on the mainline train service. I may have mastered travelling by train, but only in the immediate neighbour-hood, or to Thame and Uxbridge which I knew well. But hold on, I thought. I was the same Autistic man who just the previous year had said anything is possible if you put your mind to it! Now I had to live up to this remark. In order to be able to become more flexible socially, I had to be able to master travelling in an unfamiliar place on my own, and understand how to read and decipher a map. This became one of my new goals for 2000. Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 1 0 1 I had decided to accomplish this aim in steps. First, I would attempt to visit fairly local places by bus, but ones I had never yet been to. Then I would go further afield, and finally master the London underground, the ultimate challenge for a vulnerable ‘timid of the unknown’ Autistic person in a place which is noisy, very crowded and can be bewildering for someone who doesn’t know it very well. As a first choice I attempted to visit a Tesco store in Amersham which I had heard had a nice café with sausages and chips. I got on the bus and after I paid my fare I asked the driver if he could let me know when we got there since I had never been there before. ‘No!’ came the reply. ‘I haven’t got time! If I told every passenger where they were going when they got there I’d never go anywhere, would I?’ ‘Good start,’ I thought. ‘I may go five miles down the road too far and not realise it.’ Fortunately, I was able to ask one of the passengers and once I was on the bus back home I thought, ‘First step achieved.’ Next stop in my travelling experience was to go to Reading, quite a bit further. This was a bit more daunting, especially as I had one or two experiences there that someone might in any large city. Once while I was walking in the street on a coldish day, a totally unknown woman approached me and gave me my orders without even introducing herself! She said, ‘I’ve only just arrived and I’m quite cold, so please take me into that café across the street and buy me a cup of tea to warm me up and give me as much money as you have to spare.’ I promptly told a white lie, that I was in a hurry to catch the train and walked briskly on – yes I was a little devil. I was learning some of the social tricks of the trade for getting out of situations and I now knew what a white lie was and how to use one! On other occasions as often as five or six times on separate days a van would pull up beside me and the occupants would try to talk me into buying a new stereo system in their van. Once again these were total strangers. I just said, ‘No thanks.’ Despite some mishaps along the way, I had achieved my objectives in these previously unfamiliar places, and now it was time for the big challenge in London. In order to carry out this seemingly daunting task (as challenging as a normal adult making it across half the Sahara desert relying only on a good map), I first summoned the help of two 1 0 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E of my friends from the university bookshop. One of these friends works in London and thus knows the underground system very well. With their aid we traced our way across London after meeting initially at Marylebone and found the shop where my former High Wycombe friend and her sister were now based. They were not there at the time, but at least we had found the shop. I repeated this procedure on a second occasion with just one of the university friends, and then the time came for me to take the plunge and do it on my own. It was on a bank holiday Monday that I decided to try the big journey. I knew from a previous discussion that my London friend was working in the shop there on that day, and wanted to surprise her as I had promised her that I would one day. Unfortunately, while on the initial train from High Wycombe I started feeling unwell and having second thoughts – could I really do this? It was quite different without the ‘safety net’ of the help of my other friends. But then I thought, ‘Come on, pull yourself together. Just get there and then the challenge is half over.’ Despite being convinced I might have been stuck on the underground all day, my heart pounded as I finally reached my desti-nation while dodging the crowds of the Notting Hill Carnival on one of the busiest days of the year. Up the underground stairs and into the shop – there was my friend ready to greet me. That late afternoon and evening was one of the happiest of my life. I had conquered my fear of travelling to unknown places in a big way, a phobia I had for many years previously. And I was socially like a normal person, seeing some of the sights of London, telling jokes in the park (singing our song again) and going for a bite to eat together. I also was introduced to some of my friend’s family in London. Those few hours went so quickly I didn’t want them to end! Several more visits to London followed to see my friend, and I really felt that I had opened a doorway to more possibilities in general on meeting people through feeling confident enough to travel in unfamiliar places. After all, the underground is a dead cinch to me now! As usual however this period of intense happiness was not destined to last for ever, for cruel fate was about to intervene in my new-found freedom and confidence. Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 1 0 3 Things started to become miserable in a big way. First, there was an infestation of ants in the flat. It had started off with just one or two on the lounge floor, which I had put down to a normal occurrence in the summer months. But then five or six, then more and more. They had found their way in through a small hole in the lounge french doors. They started crawling on the tabletops, up the walls, and then one day what seemed like hundreds infested the kitchen. We attempted to treat it by buying some ant poison. The idea was that the ants would walk in this poison and take it back to their nest, eventually killing them. But I simply sat for hours watching them, becoming a prisoner in my own home as my Autistic worries took over once again. I became paranoid about cleanliness. What if the ants didn’t carry the poison home, but crawled into my food in the kitchen and poisoned that instead? What if I trod in the poison or if a visitor to my home did without knowing it, and then touched other things in my flat? And then I noticed some ants in my bedroom. What if I woke up one morning covered in a mass of ants in my bed? My care workers tried some ant powder instead of the other poison, but I was too scared to eat in my kitchen any more for fear of being covered with ants. Each day I would eat my meals crouching down on the floor in the hall, since this was the only room that I felt safe in. The incident has made me quite particular about cleanliness with food and drink. Yet this problem with the ants was about to become dwarfed by a much more serious event. In July 2000 I suddenly received notice that once again my tenancy agreement was coming to an end and that I had just two months to find another home. My heart sank. I had been enjoying too much of a good thing. All those three-minute walks into town I had been taking for granted. Now once more my routine was under threat. Just the thought of it made me feel ill. I had everything timed during my day, from when to leave for work to the amount of time spent doing my washing. ‘Surely not back up Amersham Hill,’ I thought. Actually, perhaps infinitely worse. The two months were now up. Unlike all the other occasions, I and my social service support had failed to find me a new home which would be suitable, and such 1 0 4 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E homes for Autistic people are very hard to come by. I had always been living in private rented accommodation until now, meaning the landlord always had the legal right to end my tenancy for his own personal reasons. Now I was in big trouble. I imagined all sorts of horrible possibilities of what might happen: the threat of being put into any kind of shared accommodation, for example. It was the thoughts of dread in being stuck in a place like this that had given me the strength to live on my own in the first place. Now it could happen, or even worse it could have ended with virtual homelessness and relying on friends to help me out. I could be some-where miles away from High Wycombe, where there were very few buses and it would take half a day to walk into town. It was the sheer fear of the uncertainty about the whole thing that stretched my resolve to the limit. One thing we had decided was to go into council property and end the private renting. Otherwise I may have to face this threat of being homeless again. But going with council help was a different and treacherous route. I could have ended up almost anywhere. There was also the option of taking legal action to fight for my rights as being a vulnerable person, but this frightened me. It would all be with an uncertain outcome and if I lost in any case I would have to move very quickly. I had visions of groups of bailiffs coming into my flat and beating me up. My health was quickly deteriorating and so was my mental state. I suffered from periods of depression and exces-sive panic, the sort I had not seen since my teenage years. After all the work I had done to help others and overcome my phobias, this was how the authorities were repaying me! Had it continued for much longer I might have closed up into my little box of parallel world thinking completely again and never recovered. Fortunately, my future fate was not going to be quite that bad, although by no means ideal either. In November 2000 I finally did succeed in gaining a council flat so at least I had the security of that. There would be no more immediate threats of homelessness, but there would also be no more three-minute trips into town. My new home is about a mile from High Wycombe, and like its Amersham Hill predecessor, it is near the top of a large hill. Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 1 0 5 Suddenly my three-minute walk had become ten times longer. My routine had been turned upside down. This is one of the most trau-matic experiences that an Autistic person can have in terms of affecting his well-being. This home is not even directly on a bus route, but right in the middle of a gap between two or three different bus services. So either I have to walk to one of the bus stops, or walk down the hill or cut through the fields, with the same choice coming home. Just think how many extra minutes I would have saved living in the previous flat with my journeys to and from town! Let us briefly examine each method of getting about. Walking to one of the bus stops is all very well in principle if the buses run on time (or even at all!), but in practice this hardly ever happens. What will today’s excuse be? Short of drivers? Mechanical failure? Roadworks? Driver was new and went the wrong way? One service is supposed to run every ten minutes – well I’ll tell you I once took an hour and thirty-five minutes just to get into the town centre when five buses didn’t come at all! Catching the bus home will cer-tainly get rid of the hill, but it’s always potluck when you’re going to get one. They may suspend them if they see two flakes of snow outside! So this option is only useful if one has all day to spare (or is too tired not to). The local town is based in a valley so walking into town from virtually any direction is not too bad on foot, but as for walking back up – well I invite people to try it up one of the big hills several times! Finally, there are two or three shortcuts, but one of these goes through the fields, and in the fields are the dogs going for walks, but often just as eager to jump up and have a go at my leg! It’s always a lottery going through there. Once I nearly fell over shaking like a leaf after a massive dog raced up to me but didn’t even touch me. An animal will always sense when you are afraid, which makes the situation worse. Despite these setbacks, life has to go on. Against all odds I have to continue with my mission of spreading Autistic awareness. Recently I have started a new task, a way that is even better than giving talks, and this is to have some of my work published. Already I have written parts of other publications, and if this writing is in print it is of course my 1 0 6 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E full autobiography. For each of my talks is a single event, with perhaps up to a few hundred people, but a book can be read by millions the world over! If I have succeeded in working for the common good of all Autism through this work I will be a very happy man. (I have also been helping other academic students not necessarily just with Autism awareness.) Perhaps this is a good time for reflection on just how far we have come on our journey with an Autistic mind. We started with a young boy with numerous phobias and a disabil-ity that his parents did not even know about. Mimicking events in an imaginary prehistoric world, this boy had no concept of how to mix with other children or on social development, being labelled mentally retarded and beyond hope. Tragedy upon tragedy occurred to this boy, like the death of his sister in a car crash, everything being as dark and unfriendly as the great ice ages of the past. Yet through the tragedy this boy gets the vital diagnosis of Autism. At last his parents knew what the problems were with their son. This provided the key to seeking the right professional help in a special Autistic unit. Slowly but surely, this individual gained in academic confidence and mental strength. Exams were always like the ‘battle’ that had to be endured, but he always won in the end. Time spent working in an adult job brought additional skills to this youngster, who found an incredible amount of hidden strength by relating real-life events to a parallel world, but always with the ability to distinguish between the two. This gave him the survival instinct and the ability to make huge decisions and cope with crises in his actual life. Then the ultimate nightmare raises the intensity of these feelings off the scale with the death of his mother, the giver of his life. This individual is then left with a miracle – hidden strength from his Mum to carry out a quest to the advantage of all Autistic people. Cities of incredible complexity and beauty spring up across the globe of this individual’s parallel world. Modern technology, banks, libraries, trading centres, universities and research centres, every part of the knowledge gained of the real world through the eyes of one Autistic boy over the years was now being used to help him in every goal in his actual life, from helping himself to thousands of others. Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 1 0 7 We see impossible academic dreams become possible for this indi-vidual, through his system, and continued support from social services. We travel through six years at university and past two Maths degrees and postgraduate work, as the boy shatters the myth that he was stupid or was ever stupid, and in doing so, also proves that there are no restrictions on what Autistic people can achieve, given the right opportunities and support. We then see the boy realise the beginning of the second part of his quest, spreading awareness of his condition with public talks up to international level all over the country, and appearing on national TV with an audience in the millions. He finally starts to write a book about his incredible breakthrough, wishing for this achievement to be repeated with countless other individuals. We shall study an extract of part of a book from one of the libraries in the leading country of this boy’s imaginary world. When he has given talks people have sometimes said, ‘You are too normal! You don’t look Autistic. How can you do all these things?’ Every individual has to have an engine room – a hidden source of strength and power to provide the platform for achievement. This individual I mention is myself, and this parallel world of the imagination is my power source. The extract from this book reads as follows: This is a nation designed to work for the common good of Autistic people and mankind in general. It was constructed from the people, for the people, to survive against all odds, having witnessed death at close hand. This nation has a bold and passionate desire to help others live more fulfilling lives. Let no goal be beyond reach, and watch your dearest dreams become reality. Let us allow a person to be judged in his entirety, to be allowed to develop his sense of humour, his strengths and his own character. Most of all let us believe in one another, instead of scratching the surface. Do not judge a book by its cover. We shall provide research centres to collect and under-stand the properties of today’s world. We shall have teachers, skilled in the art of communications, so that they may provide the key to supplying knowledge to our children and our 1 0 8 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E children’s children on how to make a better world. We shall teach them discipline, so that they will respect others. We shall teach them skills with tools to provide the building blocks for our modern society, and its continued survival. And we shall teach our citizens to have faith that all things happen for a reason. We shall provide entertainment centres, cinemas, amusement parks, playgrounds for children, and social groups where individuals can develop their sense of well-being. This nation will act as one. Every individual is entitled to the same basic human rights, and will be treated equally. Any disability will not prevent us setting and achieving goals. There are no limitations on what disabled people or any indi-viduals can accomplish provided we believe. We believe in our own ability and that of others. We all have the hidden strength of the human mind, begging to be unlocked. Let us find the key to this lock. Let us open the door to a new world of possibilities to every one of those countless individuals trapped in special homes or mental institutions, and banish for ever the idea of being beyond hope. There is always hope. We shall spread the awareness of any disability across our nation to every part of the general population, by way of public talks, TV programmes and publications. Never again will our people be without the understanding that has led to incorrect diagnosis. Parents and families will know what help to give their offspring. They will tell their friends, and they in turn will tell theirs. And ultimately the fabric of society itself will be transformed into a more caring one. The lives of millions of people will change for the better. We shall all be connected, working for the common good. We shall have dis-covered the genesis of life. We shall have fulfilled, in every one of us, life’s mission. May God have faith in us all. So here it is, ladies and gentlemen. We have arrived at my life today. Virtually every major success story I achieve and have achieved in everyday existence I have accomplished by the hidden strengths of the Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 1 0 9 human mind. My parallel world is a construction out of essentially ‘nothing’ to the most advanced technological society in existence which enables me to plan and work out nearly every decision, priority and goal plan I might have. My way of operating, coping and sussing out life’s complications in the best way I know how is due almost entirely to this system. The time has now come to make a clear distinction between fantasy and reality. I have always been able to do this. This is perhaps what makes me different from many other Autistic people in that I have been able to use this system to turn around the frustrations of life to my advantage. Every person must have some inner form of strength or self-worth in order to make progress. My way of thinking merely aided me in finding a way to channel all my setbacks and frustrations into one place, while I concentrated on my strengths and developing them, for the rest of the time. And my fantasy world details were just that, fantasy. Yet the achievements I have made, the pain and joy in each of those key moments in my life, and my faith as a person are all totally real. We can never achieve perfection, or please everyone, but we can always find strength from somewhere to give things our best shot. We may not always succeed, but let’s just say we gave it one hell of a try. I still have problems sometimes with everyday life, even today. To be confident socially is the most daunting for me – to go out with a friend to the cinema, or out for a meal, to go shopping together, or a walk in the park. Doing things like these, and being able to trust people enough to do them, would mean so much, yet I have only occa-sionally managed it so far. When I see people that seem kind and helpful, it makes me wish harder than ever to be normal, and for my Autism to vanish. Because of my lack of confidence, I am terribly afraid of upsetting others without realising it or meaning to, by saying or doing the wrong thing. I wish I could read their minds, then I would know what they wished for and I could do the right thing. Socialising is harder than any Maths equation for me. What works for one person doesn’t for another. People do not always say what they mean, or stick to what they say. 1 1 0 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E I recently plucked up enough courage to attend a local disco at my tennis club and had the time of my life showing the others how it’s done on the dance floor! I was making up for lost time on all those missed school discos. But I need more opportunities to make further progress. Always my apprehension holds me back. I’m always afraid of invading people’s privacy when I’m not wanted, even with quite good friends, to such an extent that if I meet them one day, I may go else-where for the next two before returning in case I meet them again, even by accident! For if I did I would feel I had invaded their space, or that they may be fed up with saying hello again so soon. This is not allowed, under my resolutions of operation. And there are always the little things. Did that person see me or not? If I say hello they may be busy and not want to stop. If I don’t greet them they may be hurt, thinking that I just ignored them on purpose. If only I could read their minds, and what they wanted me to do. Then I could do the right thing (the prime objective). The end of our incredible journey will be at the place where it all began. The beginnings of life. I shall now discuss how we can help and everyone of us do our part in bringing some of these goals of mine to physical reality, from the earliest days to an adult in the population. It’s all very well having ambitious plans in the mind, but we live in a physical world with physical restrictions imposed on every one of us on what we can realistically accomplish. How on earth can a seem-ingly helpless Autistic child who is totally dependent on his parents for virtually every aspect of life be transformed into a confident self-supporting adult, working and coping with independent living in the outside world? Let alone set about changing the lives of thousands of others for the better. It can’t be accomplished overnight. In order to understand how to make progress, we must first go back to the begin-ning. We must understand the task in its entirety that lies before us. Discussion of this can be found in Appendix 1. We are coming to the end of the chapters on my life experiences year by year, but by no means the end of the book. There follow a number of appendices which concentrate on particular interests and hobbies of mine in greater depth than I have been able to cover in the Y E A R S 3 1 T O T H E P R E S E N T D A Y 1 1 1 main text. These topics range from astronomy and parts of higher mathematics, to helping the wider population with Autism awareness, to humour and joke telling. It is my belief that different people will have different interests and not everyone will wish to read topics other than their favourites. So by organising them in this way I invite people to take their choice, either to stick with the main Autistic life story or to read about some or all of my interests, or a mixture of both. 1 1 2 M A K I N G S E N S E O F T H E U N F E A S I B L E