Chapter 1 Then and Now The curious paradox is that when I accept myself just as I am, then I can change. — Carl Rogers In November of 2008, at the age of 50, I was diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome. This diagnosis led to a process of self-reflection that culminated in the writing of my memoir, The Uncharted Path: My Journey with Late-Diagnosed Autism. After the book was published in July of 2010, I found myself wanting to believe that I had told my story, once and for all. While I knew that my life was rapidly changing, I wanted my book to incarnate me—to say, in the words of the poet Matthew Arnold, “Time stand still here!” But, of course, time doesn’t stand still, nor do we. The reality is that our lives can, and do, change—sometimes dramatically. For most of my life, I had been a very high-functioning person, but by early 2009, I felt burned out, overwhelmed, and exhausted. As I watched my memoir make its way in the world, though, I became amazed by the changes that were happening in my life. After finishing the book and sending it off for publication, I began to be able to do a great deal more, and with much more enjoyment, than I had before. And now, as I write these words in mid-2011, my life is happier, more productive, and more fulfilling than ever. I have recovered from the burnout and regained my independence, my self-esteem, my energy, and my sense of purpose. In The Uncharted Path, I listed the tasks with which I was having difficulty and needed assistance. They included: •Food shopping •Sweeping and mopping the floors •Cooking •Driving •Running errands •Going to appointments •Being alone •Planning, executing, and transitioning between tasks •Working at a job •Making friends And here is where things stand now. Food shopping. Going to the food co-op is no longer the sensory-aversive experience it once was. I now use Sonic Defender earplugs whenever I am there, rather than the noise-blocking headset I once had to wear. The earplugs allow me to block ambient sound while being able to hear a person talking with me directly. With my earplugs, I have been able to put sound in the background for the first time in my life and to attend to a person speaking to me without becoming overwhelmed. As a result, I’ve experienced a new sense of freedom and power. I can now carry on a conversation at the co-op without needing to resort to writing things down. I love going there, buying my food, choosing flowers to plant, and making friendly conversation with the people I meet. I go several times a week and I always look forward to it. Keeping house. My main difficulty with housecleaning had been the dizziness that attends my vestibular issues. But over time, I began to learn how to move my body slowly and carefully so as to avoid feeling physically off balance. After a while, I adapted so well that I took over all the cleaning myself and no longer needed assistance. Since then, I’ve been vacuuming, mopping, dusting, cleaning the bathroom, and doing all the other household chores. Because I’m one of those very weird people who actually likes these activities, regaining my ability to do them has been a big plus for me. Cooking. I have rediscovered the fun of cooking. For a long time, my vestibular issues had kept me from it, because I had found it difficult to lean down to get pots and pans out of lower cabinets, and to reach up for bowls and dishes in upper cabinets. But, as I did when housecleaning, I’ve learned to move my body slowly and carefully to avoid dizziness as much as possible. As a result, among other things, I now make a great Mexican Mole, Curried Tofu, and Lemon-Garlic Chicken. Driving. I’m driving again. I’m not commuting 50 miles every day, mind you, but when I need to get somewhere, I can get in the car and go without any difficulty. I’m fortunate in that I live downtown and much is available to me without driving. I love to walk and I can get to many places on foot. But it’s very helpful to be able to drive when I want to, especially since I was able to attend my daughter’s high school soccer games this past fall and to visit people in other towns, including a young man with cerebral palsy whom I’ve befriended. One of the reasons that driving has become enjoyable is that I’ve spent the past few years protecting my hearing. Before I started blocking sound, I was spending an inordinate amount of time parsing it and becoming overwhelmed by it. As a result, I did not have the energy for fully attending to my other senses, particularly my visual sense. Driving became difficult because I felt overwhelmed by visual phenomena. Now that I have given myself permission to put sound in the background, my other senses have settled down considerably, and the visual world, far from being overwhelming, gives me great delight. Keeping track of finances and paying bills. For most of my adult life, I had the responsibility of paying every bill and accounting for every penny. I was the primary (and, for several years, the only) breadwinner in my first marriage, and keeping track of the finances was always my job. I chose it, because it gave me a sense of control—and because I hugely disliked trusting someone else to get it right. When I married Bob and quit my job to be a full-time, homeschooling mom in 2003, I let him take over the bill paying and finance tracking, because I trusted him and, frankly, I wanted the break. After a while though, I found that I missed it. So now, in addition to handling the finances for my books, I’ve again taken on the responsibility for paying the bills each week, for keeping track of our expenses from day to day, and for ensuring that there is always sufficient money in our accounts. Given that these activities combine my love of organizing things, my keen attentiveness to detail, and my innate good sense when it comes to money, I get a lot of satisfaction out of them. Running errands. I once cringed at the idea of running…an…an…an… errand. The possibility of auditory overload made me very anxious. But now, I look forward to going out and about. I like going to the post office, the bank, the art supplies store, the hardware store, and any other place without loud music cranked up. I use my earplugs for running errands, mainly to keep out competing sounds that my auditory system has to work too hard to process and manage. But if I have a question or need to pay for my items, I can converse. Going to appointments. When I have an appointment, sometimes talking works and sometimes it doesn’t. Everything depends upon the level of ambient noise, whether the other person is in a rush and talking quickly, how many people are in the room and participating in the conversation, and whether I have time to take notes and ask for clarification. One day last year, I went up to the local community college to discuss taking some online courses there. I needed to sit down with an adviser for an hour or so, and before I went, I called the office by means of the text relay service and told the adviser just what I needed. I let her know that if there were too much noise, or if we were too rushed, or if there were too many people in the environment, I’d need to use my text-to-text device. As it turned out, she was very sensitive to my needs, and we had a very enjoyable verbal conversation in a very quiet place. I decided not to take courses there after all, but I was glad that I was able to explore the option. Six months before, it would have seemed overwhelmingly beyond me. Being alone. Staying at home while Bob was traveling was my biggest challenge. For a while, I’d go with him on his frequent visits to New York City—partly just to travel out of town once in awhile, partly to see his dad, and partly to avoid being by myself, with all the fear and trembling being alone engendered. But now, I find myself enjoying the time alone. I love when Bob is here and I also love my solitude when I have the house to myself. I no longer suffer from anxiety and loneliness. In fact, when I am alone and in quiet, I find that I have even greater focus, discipline, and peace than ever before. What a tremendous change! It was a long time coming. Planning, executing, and transitioning between tasks. It’s been so long that I’ve had a problem in this area that I barely remember what it felt like. Now, I plan tasks with ease and I look forward to putting them into action— whether it’s putting together a shopping list before going to the co-op, planning and cooking a meal, paying bills, balancing our house accounts, writing, editing, gardening, or any number of other activities. What seemed like a life-changing difficulty two years ago is now so far in the past that I can see it for what it was—the result of a temporary low point from which I have recovered. With my renewed ability to put my gifts for organizing and planning into play, the quality of my life has improved dramatically. Working at a job. I’ve had some false starts and stops on the way to figuring out the best fit. Working at the local thrift store didn’t pan out for me, because the crowds and the music tended to overload my hearing. I’ve been making knitted items for the store to sell each winter, but I can’t work in crowded spaces. My auditory sensitivities make that impossible, even with ear protection. However, I’ve been able to bring all my years of editing experience to my work as a copy editor for our local, award-winning, independent weekly, The Commons. It’s great to be working again, especially for a nonprofit paper, at a job I enjoy. I am also putting my love of helping people to work in my position as a personal care assistant to a little boy with multiple disabilities. After being thoroughly trained in how to respond to his needs, I care for him both at his home and at my own. And, in the fall of 2011, I will be pursuing a master’s degree in History and Culture through Union Institute and University, with a concentration in Disability Studies. Union offers a fully online master’s program that will take me three years to complete. Making friends. Over the past two years, I have begun making new friends, both autistic and non-autistic, and I love my time with them. I have learned that I have to seek out sensitive people, no matter what their neurology. Sensitive people will respect my experience and listen to what I need, and I can offer exactly the same to them. I am a highly sensitive person, so it makes sense that I would be most compatible with other highly sensitive people. I’m also incredibly fortunate to live in a very friendly neighborhood. I enjoy chatting and laughing with the neighbors and helping them out. On my walks, I have all kinds of interesting talks with people, much as I did when my daughter was young and it seemed that I knew everyone in town. So Rachel, what happened? Did your autism get better? No, it didn’t get better—for the simple reason that it had never gotten worse. It only felt as though it had. I’ve since realized that the temporary fluctuation of abilities I was experiencing a couple of years ago wasn’t the result of autism, but of failing to take autism into consideration and live my life accordingly. In other words, because I didn’t know that I had Asperger’s, I couldn’t manage the condition—or my life—properly. I spent the first 50 years of my life doggedly attempting to eat, work, play, speak, act, and achieve like a typical person, and then some. I didn’t just go full steam ahead like a person with a typical neurology. I went beyond even that, probably in an attempt to compensate for what was different about me. Even if I had had typical wiring all those years, I could have easily driven myself into the ground. As it was, I was like a person with mobility issues trying to run a marathon every day and keep up with people whose bodies worked differently from mine. Burnout was inevitable. In a few short years, I seemed to go from a lifetime of being super-functional to struggling with basic things, like going food shopping. I thought it was the autism catching up with me. It wasn’t. It was my lifelong ignorance of being autistic that was catching up with me—along with the fact that I’d been put on medication that was wreaking havoc with my sensory and emotional life. Before my diagnosis, I never rested. I never gave myself a break. I never took care of my sensory needs. I never said “no” to anything. I never understood the impact of medication on my body and mind. I just drove myself, and drove myself, and drove myself, thinking that with just a little more effort, everything would work out. And then, when the burnout hit, I had to stop—and suddenly, I found myself struggling. Two years later, my body and mind have healed from the twin effects of burnout and harmful medication. Now that I understand how I work, taking care of myself has become a reflex. Taking breaks has become integrated into the fabric of my life. Making my needs clear has become a necessity. Being open about the adaptations I need to make has become a source of pride. And getting off the medication that had inflamed my sensory and emotional sensitivities has given me back my life. In learning to take care of myself, I have said goodbye to meltdowns and welcomed a great deal more calm and reason into my everyday experience. The world is not exactly set up to make my way of being easy, and so I have to advocate for myself as well as I can. The process of learning to self-advocate, which has involved understanding our culture’s attitudes toward disability, has been a healing and empowering endeavor. Being a woman and disabled, I’ve got a double set of messages to overcome about sitting down and shutting up—but I am overcoming them just fine, day by day, and I am committed to doing so. Accepting my disabilities and working in harmony with them have been the key to healing the burnout and enjoying the things that are meaningful to me. The first 50 years of my life were about surviving. But I’m no longer just surviving. I’m living and thriving, and I intend to continue doing so every day for the rest of my life. This book tells the story of how I got there. Chapter 2 When Medications Do Harm The biggest drug-addiction problem in the world doesn’t involve heroin, cocaine, or marijuana. In fact, it doesn’t involve an illegal drug at all. The world’s biggest drug-addiction problem is posed by a group of drugs, the benzodiazepines, which are widely prescribed by doctors and taken by countless millions of perfectly ordinary people around the world. — Vernon Coleman In February of 2005, to treat an increase in my level of anxiety, my primary care doctor prescribed a medication called Lorazepam. Little did I know that taking this drug would send me on a years-long journey of coping with ever-increasing depression, fear, loss of functioning, and social isolation. Fortunately, in 2010, I changed course and began walking a new road. I engaged in the process of learning about how the medication had affected my life, and I went through the ordeal of weaning off it. As a result, my high level of functioning, my independence, and my zest for life have all returned. Medication Withdrawal and Other Delights From early 2005 until early 2009, I took one 0.5 mg tablet of Lorazepam upon awakening in the morning and another before going to sleep at night. After I had been on the medication for four years, another doctor increased the dosage to 0.5 mg in the morning and 1.0 mg at night. By early 2010, I was taking 2.0 mg per day. A third doctor also put me on Zoloft (an SSRI) and Topamax (for migraine prevention), in addition to Lorazepam and Amitriptyline (a tricyclic antidepressant). By the spring of 2010, I had begun to realize that the medications, far from helping me, were making it increasingly difficult to manage my life. I was crying almost every day and I was nearly housebound. So I began the process of weaning off all of them—without medical supervision. My primary care doctor had fired me from her practice after I asked for accommodations for my disability, and it took me over a month to find another doctor who would accommodate me and guide me through the weaning process. Meanwhile, I was on my own. Tapering off Zoloft, Topamax, and Amitriptyline posed no problem whatsoever. Quitting Lorazepam, however, was another story. After attempting to withdraw from Lorazepam by decreasing my dosage by 0.5 mg per week, I suffered an acute reaction. I began to have a tremendous amount of anxiety, and my sleep worsened. After I stopped taking the medication altogether, I hardly slept for two nights. I was sweating through my clothes. I was crying and frightened. I was in so much physical pain that it was almost unbearable. I felt as though my body and mind were coming apart. I found myself pacing up and down the floors of our house saying, “Misery, misery, misery.” Without a physician to consult, I couldn’t understand why the withdrawal was having this impact. With nowhere else to turn, I went online and looked up information on how to taper off Lorazepam without pushing myself to the edge of sanity. When I did, I found out that it’s a benzodiazepine and a tranquilizer. In other words, it’s in the same category as Valium and Librium, and it’s highly addictive. In fact, in 1975, the U.S. Department of Justice demanded that benzodiazepines be classified as schedule IV drugs under the Controlled Substances Act. And yet, this medication had been prescribed for me by three different doctors—even after I had told them, in no uncertain terms, that I absolutely did not want to take anything narcotic or addictive. What part of that statement did they not understand? Or did they just not know what Lorazepam does? As I soon found out, I was not alone in suffering acute withdrawal symptoms. According to Professor Malcolm Lader, member of the UK Committee on the Review of Medicines, Lorazepam is a particularly difficult drug to withdraw from. “When somebody comes into my office and says that they’ve been trying to stop their Lorazepam,” he said, “my heart sinks, because I know I shall have twice as much of a problem as getting them off, say, Valium. The symptoms are more severe, they’re more persistent, more bizarre, and people are much more distressed by them.” (Ashton, “A Problem”) In my online travels, I found a support site for people seeking to withdraw safely from benzodiazepines—and I learned that, when done properly, the process takes six to 12 months. So, in early May, I put myself on a stabilization dose of 1.5 mg per day, and I found myself able to sleep and to tolerate being in my body again. After three weeks, I began tapering very slowly, cutting my dosage by very small decrements, until I finally finished my taper, under the care of a new primary care doctor, eight months later. Suffice it to say that, even over the course of a slow taper, the withdrawal process was brutal. Every time I made a cut in my dosage, I experienced extreme amounts of muscle pain, insomnia, anxiety, depression, and exhaustion. I was determined to rid Lorazepam from my body, though, and by the grace of God, I have. But the havoc this medication wrought over the years I took it is, unfortunately, an all-too-common effect of benzodiazepines. Daily Interdose Withdrawals Lorazepam is a short half-life benzodiazepine. On average, the dose reaches its peak blood levels in about seven to eight hours. As I came to understand how quickly the concentration of the drug in my bloodstream was falling each day, my experience of the previous five years started to come into focus. Because I had been taking the medication only in the morning and in the evening, I had been going through interdose withdrawals on a daily basis, with all the same symptoms that would attend my eight-month taper. That’s right: I had been having withdrawal symptoms every single day for four years. No one had ever warned me about how the medication worked, so I couldn’t figure out why I was on such a physical and emotional roller-coaster ride. Nothing in my life seemed to account for it, and the only response from my prescribing doctors was to increase my dosage. These increases did not work. In addition to the impact of falling blood concentrations, daily withdrawal symptoms occur because of the tolerance that the body develops, very quickly, to the drug itself. As Dr. C. Heather Ashton writes in Benzodiazepines: How They Work and How to Withdraw, these drugs “lose much of their efficacy because of the development of tolerance. When tolerance develops, ‘withdrawal’ symptoms can appear even though the user continues to take the drug.” (Chapter II) Because they quickly become ineffective and trigger daily withdrawal symptoms, benzodiazepines cause a host of problems, many of which they were intended to manage. In early 2009, after four years of benzodiazepine use, I exhibited difficulties common to benzodiazepine users. I was crying on a regular basis. I was falling into a depression unlike anything I had ever experienced. My anxiety was nearly paralyzing. And I had become almost housebound. The outside world felt overwhelming, and going out triggered both fear and exhaustion. All of these symptoms amount to a textbook case of the impact of benzodiazepines. In her research, Dr. Ashton determined that people who use these drugs become ill with a number of psychiatric conditions. “Many patients,” she writes, “find that anxiety symptoms gradually increase over the years despite continuous benzodiazepine use, and panic attacks and agoraphobia may appear for the first time after years of chronic use.” She adds that long-term benzodiazepine use can cause depression in people with no history of it and can aggravate depression in people already suffering from it. (ibid, Chapter I) Heightened Sensory Sensitivity As a person with autism, I found that all of the symptoms that attend benzodiazepine use were exacerbated by the impact of interdose withdrawals on my sensory functioning. By early 2009, I was more sensory sensitive than I had ever been in my life. Sometimes, my skin felt like tissue paper; at other times, loud noises were enough to send me into physical pain that took me days to recover from. Light seemed very bright, and I began wearing sunglasses, even on winter days. I became overwhelmed by this sudden severe spike in sensitivity, and every foray into the outside world took all the courage and energy I could muster. My level of functioning decreased significantly. Most days, I just stayed home. I couldn’t figure out what was happening. Then, I read Dr. Ashton’s findings on benzodiazepine withdrawal and sensory sensitivity. She notes that “a characteristic feature of benzodiazepine withdrawal is a heightened sensitivity to all sensations— hearing, sight, touch, taste and smell. When extreme, these sensations can be disturbing.” She describes one woman needing to stop all the clocks in her house because their ticking seemed unbearably loud. Others have had to wear dark glasses because ordinary light seemed “dazzlingly bright.” (ibid, Chapter III) I’d finally found an answer to the question of why my sensory sensitivities had increased so dramatically in a relatively short period of time: the daily interdose withdrawals were sending my already acutely sensitive system into overdrive. After four years of benzodiazepine use, I could barely socialize at all. I felt very isolated and I suffered from severe levels of stress that were lowering my levels of functioning. As I learned about the havoc that these drugs wreak, I considered myself lucky to be tapering off them before they stole any more years from my life. Recovering from Benzodiazepines The good news is that my functioning and my quality of life have improved dramatically since withdrawing from Lorazepam. Just halfway through a difficult taper, I found my mind becoming clearer and my mood lifting. I felt more physically and emotionally resilient than I had in years. As my taper progressed, I began to feel alive again. I still had my sensory-sensitive “I don’t want to go anywhere” days, but even on those days, I forced myself to go out for a walk, just to keep intact my connection to the world. In so doing, to my great surprise, I found my connection to the world not limited to human beings, but to all of creation. I began to walk and appreciate the trees, the colors, the breeze blowing—even the humid weather of a New England summer. I carried my camera with me everywhere and I took pictures that enabled me to see hidden things, simple things, beautiful things that I’d never registered before. Suddenly, the world became a fascinating place. Ultimately, I entered three of my best photos in a local contest, won second prize, and had the pleasure of seeing my work displayed in town with that of other photographers. Since I’ve withdrawn from the medication entirely, the positive effects have only increased, and my sensory sensitivities have quieted down appreciably. I go out every day, in any weather, even in winter. I’ve made new friends and rekindled relationships with old ones. The depression and agoraphobia are both entirely gone, and my high levels of functioning and independence have returned. My experience is not unique. In 1991, Karl Rickels, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, reported that patients who had gotten off benzodiazepines were doing “significantly” better than those who had failed to do so. A few years later, he found that after long-term users withdrew from benzodiazepines, they “became more alert, more relaxed, and less anxious, and this change was accompanied by improved psychomotor functions.” (Whitaker, 136-137) As for Dr. Ashton, she found that agoraphobia in her patients disappeared within a year of withdrawal, even in patients who had been housebound. Furthermore, most users experienced a dramatic increase in quality of life after withdrawal: Clinical experience shows that most long-term benzodiazepine users actually feel better after coming off the drugs. Many users have remarked that it was not until they came off their drugs that they realised they had been operating below par for all the years they had been taking them. It was as though a net curtain or veil had been lifted from their eyes: slowly, sometimes suddenly, colours became brighter, grass greener, mind clearer, fears vanished, mood lifted, and physical vigour returned. (ibid, Chapter II) When I was on benzodiazepines, my emotions were scattered, my sensory sensitivities were through the roof, and I found it difficult to think clearly. Once I stopped taking them, my emotions became much more moderate, positive, and under my control; my sensory sensitivities became much more manageable; my thoughts became sharper by the day; and my zest for life returned. Needless to say, all of these changes allowed me to regain my independence and re-enter the flow of life. Once I did, I began to get to work on understanding the greatest challenge of my Asperger’s: my auditory processing difficulties. Chapter 3 How I Hear Self-knowledge is the beginning of self-improvement. — Baltasar Gracián Of all the elements of Asperger’s Syndrome, my auditory processing difficulties have always been, by far, my most pressing concern. In July of 2010, hoping to learn more detailed information about the nature of these difficulties, I sought out the services of an audiologist. After three audiology assessments, I was equipped with information that has enabled me to take better care of myself and to navigate the world more fully. My Auditory Difficulties My hearing challenges include difficulties filtering and prioritizing the sounds that I hear, integrating the sounds that come into both of my ears simultaneously, and following verbal conversations that go on at great length. My difficulties increase in environments with ambient sound, when multiple people are present, or when people are speaking quickly or otherwise unclearly. When I hear, I see the spelled-out words in my mind, and I have to internally read and translate those words in order to understand their meanings. As a result, even in quiet environments, I cannot keep up with verbal input for more than five to 10 minutes without falling behind, unless the other person slows down his or her speech and leaves a number of pauses in which I can respond. Pacing is everything. The more people present in a verbal interaction (such as a class or meeting), the faster I lose track of the word pictures. When there are too many conversations going on at once, I see the word pictures from all of them. The verbal streams either become superimposed on one another, resulting in the words sounding garbled, or they branch out separately from one another, and my mind cannot follow all of them. In both cases, while I can hear the sound, I cannot translate it. Visual Hearing and Frequencies That Fade Out In July of 2010, I underwent a two-hour audiology assessment that gave me a very clear sense of my difficulties. Until the assessment, I knew that I was having problems with auditory processing, but I had not been able to understand them in enough detail to know how to manage my life with them. The detailed nature of my audiologist’s report gave me the tools I needed to address my challenges in more creative and adaptive ways. From a medical point of view, I learned that I have the following: •A mild hearing loss in my right ear •A moderate hearing loss in my left ear •Tinnitus •An auditory processing disorder I hadn’t been aware of the hearing loss, and I still wonder whether it’s really a loss or it’s been with me from the start. I also wasn’t aware that the intermittent, high-pitched static in my head was tinnitus; I’ve experienced it, on and off, all my life. And of course, the interesting auditory processing system I carry around was not news to me. But all of those conditions form the medical point of view. From my internal point of view, the assessment showed me, in new and interesting ways, just how much I employ visual strategies in order to translate sound, and navigate the hearing and speaking world. The audiologist gave me several hearing tests, all of which took place in a sound-proof booth—my idea of heaven. After I told her that my experience of sound is acute, she adjusted the volume for each test so that the sound would not be aversive. For the first test, in order to get a baseline for what I could actually hear, she simply gave me a series of words to repeat. Then things got really interesting. Auditory Patterning This test measures how well a person can hear and replicate relative pitch. The audiologist played a series of three sounds and asked me to tell her whether the pattern was “low-low-high,” “high-high-low,” and so on. I took the auditory patterning test twice. The first time, I used my hand to replicate each sound. If the pattern was “low-low-high,” I moved my hand twice on the same plane before moving it up once. In doing so, I was able to see the sound visually and give the answer. When the test was over, I told the audiologist about the method I’d used, and she said, “Okay. We’re going to do the test again. This time, sit on your hands!” I tried not to panic. She played the sounds again. This time, I saw the sounds in my mind as colored dots: pink for low and red for high. Apparently, this is a form of synaesthesia, something I don’t remember having experienced before. Using my visual strategies, I scored 100% in each ear, on both tests. After all, ordering things into patterns will be the last of my faculties to go. Auditory Closure This test measures how well a person can hear words spoken very quickly. Difficulty in this area can have a direct impact on a person’s ability to understand degraded speech. For most of the test, I was guessing at words spoken so quickly that I could barely make them out. Sometimes, I simply couldn’t hear anything except undifferentiated sound; I’d just throw up my hands and shake my head. When all was said and done, I scored 48% in my left ear and 52% in my right ear—both in the Poor range. In the understatement of the year, the audiologist’s report noted that I was “presenting below normal limits in this area of processing.” This test was very difficult because I couldn’t hear the words clearly enough to form a word-picture in my mind. I’m unable to hear soft consonant sounds like “p” or “th”; they’re at a frequency that my ears don’t pick up. (Later in the assessment, the audiologist ran a test that showed that the cilia in my left ear, which should be picking up this frequency, are inactive.) Any sound at this frequency drops out at the end of a word. When words come at me slowly, I can usually run through the list of possible meanings in my mind’s eye—but when the words come at me quickly, the sense of the sound fading away is especially acute, and my ability to see the words in my mind breaks down. For instance, in the assessment, for the word stop, I heard sto-. For all I knew, the word could have been stop, stock, or stall. When I couldn’t see the word in my mind, I became very frustrated with the process, which accounts for why I become overwhelmed when people around me are talking too quickly. Binaural Interaction This test measures word recognition in noise. Difficulty in this area can have a significant impact on a person’s ability to understand speech in the presence of ambient sound. The sound can include anything from the scraping of chairs, to the hum of fans and overhead projectors, to speech. People with difficulties in this area often require a greater signal-to-noise ratio in order to pick up and understand more of what is being said. The audiologist played a series of words spoken in the midst of noise —noise that I can only describe as a combination of static and the sound of an airplane flying directly overhead. In my left ear, I could recognize 80% of the words, which rates somewhere in the middle of Good; in my right ear, I could recognize only 68%, which lies at the border of Poor. (Poor is below 68%.) During the assessment, the only way for me to distinguish the words from the noise was to see them as spelled-out words and hold them in my memory. Each time, my repetition of the word was delayed because I had to work quickly past being overwhelmed, fish the word out of the noise, hold it in my mind, look at it, and read it out loud. Binaural Integration This test measures how well a person can hear out of both ears simultaneously. The audiologist played a series of four numbers: two in one ear, and two in the other. I had to repeat the numbers to her. I got very anxious at the prospect of having to decode competing sounds, but I did surprisingly well on this test: 90% in my left ear and 92.5% in my right ear. However, the high scores are deceiving, because the process was not in the least intuitive. I kept my eyes closed, I listened very hard, I memorized what I heard, I visually lined up the images of the numbers in my mind’s eye, and then I spoke them. I did lots and lots of work, which resulted in lots and lots of delay. It’s a good thing I’ve developed lots and lots of patience. My Auditory Processing Continues to Go Awry A few months after my initial audiology assessment, I began to realize that my auditory processing had gotten significantly worse. When I called my audiologist, she agreed that I needed to come in as soon as possible. In early November, when I went in for the appointment, she gave me the same set of tests she had given me in July. The results were mixed. The Good News First, the good news: the mild hearing loss in my right ear and the moderate hearing loss in my left ear had remained stable. In addition, I was still scoring 100% on the auditory patterning test, and on the auditory closure test, I scored exactly as I had in July. The auditory closure scores were still in the Poor range, but they had not gotten any worse. The Bad News Unfortunately, the tests of binaural interaction and binaural integration showed significant decreases in auditory processing. As noted earlier, the binaural interaction test measures word recognition in noise. In my assessment in July, I had been able to fish many of the words out of the noise, hold them in my visual memory as word-pictures, and then speak them. In my assessment in November, I immediately noticed a significant change in my experience of the test. I couldn’t make out enough sounds in most of the words to form a word picture in my mind at all. A number of words simply disappeared into the background noise. For others, I could make out a vowel sound and a consonant, but I could not venture a guess as to the other letters. At one point, when I was nearly in tears with frustration, the audiologist stopped the test and simply played a series of words without any background noise at all, first in one ear, and then in the other. In contrast to experiencing the words disappearing into the noise, I felt as though I were looking at black letters standing out against a white background. I scored 100% in quiet. Then, she kept going with the words in noise, and the letters began fading out again. In July, I had scored 80% in my left ear and 68% in my right ear. In November, I scored 32% in my left ear and 20% in my right ear—a significant drop. We then moved on to the binaural integration test, in which the audiologist played four numbers—two in one ear, two in the other— to see how well I could hear out of both ears simultaneously. This test was immensely frustrating. In my July assessment, I had dealt with my processing limitations by memorizing what I’d heard, visually lining up the images of the numbers in my mind’s eye, and then speaking them. In November, I could not line up the images in my mind’s eye at all. By the time I had gotten to the last couple of numbers, the first couple had faded from view. A few times, I remembered three of the four, but mostly I could only identify one or two. At one point, in order to simplify the process, I concentrated only on the sound coming into my right ear so, of course, I heard only half of what came into both ears. In July, I had scored 90% in my left ear and 92.5% in my right ear. In my November assessment, I scored 28% in my left ear and 65% in my right ear—another significant decrease. A follow-up assessment in February of 2011 showed similar results. Vocal Tones and Verbal Conversation As I pondered the results of my audiology assessments, I discovered an interesting facet of my hearing: some voices are a comfort to my system, and others have just the opposite effect. Unfortunately, the difference may not be apparent to most observers; in fact, it’s taken a long while for me to figure out the difference myself. Doing so has gone a long way toward easing my frustrations with my hearing and has allowed me to choose situations in which I can hear more easily. I’ve learned that I do very well conversing with people who have a certain tone to their voices. My husband, for instance, has a voice that is always easy for me to listen to, no matter what emotion he is expressing. His tone is even, gentle, and almost musical. I’ve made many friends in my community over the past three years, and all of them have vocal tones that I enjoy listening to. As a result, because I’m not defending against an aversive auditory experience, I can attend more easily to the words they say and carry on longer verbal conversations. Other people, though, have vocal tones that feel grating to my system. Some of these folks are among the kindest, most interesting people I’ve ever met, but I have difficulty conversing with them because of the way that I experience the sound of their voices. My auditory system spends so much time defending against the vocal tones that I have less energy and attention for processing the words. In the past, I’ve passed judgment on people I had difficulty listening to because I didn’t understand that the frustration and pain I felt was sensory. Now that I do, I can better identify what is irking me, see people more clearly for who they are, and engage in more enjoyable conversation with them, albeit for limited periods. Moving Forward After my assessments, and on the advice of my audiologist, I consulted with a neurologist, who examined me and could find no physical reason for the change in my processing abilities. My MRI was clear, and all of my neurological tests came back normal. After hearing that my father had had the same condition with the same progression, she concluded that the cause was very likely genetic. The neurologist suggested that I might want to see another specialist, but she didn’t think that further testing would show anything of any use. My primary care doctor agreed, and we decided that my time would be better spent putting my energy into living with an unusual hearing condition than searching down the potential cause of something that was not going to change. And so, I began the process of better adapting to my hearing difficulties. As I did, I discovered a great many strategies for dealing with other aspects of Asperger’s Syndrome. Chapter 4 Adapting to Life with a Disability When you have a disability, you have to accommodate it, and change your life around it, in a multitude of different ways. At first you say to yourself, “But this is the way it has always been. What will happen if I do it another way?” And then, after you’ve adjusted a bit and accommodated a bit, you find yourself having to accommodate more, and to tweak more things.... Eventually, though, you go back to the basics and find very creative ways to accommodate your disability and function in the world around you. — Kate Goldfield Learning the particulars of how my auditory processing works has enabled me to develop a number of strategies for how to walk through the world with my particular style of hearing. Understanding the visual nature of my hearing has also helped me to adapt to other elements of Asperger’s Syndrome. Strategizing with Auditory Difficulties After reflecting on the results of my auditory assessments, I decided to put together a list of ways to navigate with my hearing difficulties. I asked myself a number of questions: How should I handle ambient sound? What should I do when I feel that I might have missed something? How should I handle situations in which people are speaking too quickly? With the help of my audiologist, here is the list I compiled: 1. Use earplugs to block sound when necessary. Doing so puts a great deal of sound into the background while enabling me to converse with people. It also gives my auditory system a necessary rest. 2. During conversation, make every attempt to decrease or eliminate background noise. 3. When receiving instructions or directions verbally, check in with the person providing them to make sure that I’ve understood what has been said, particularly if no written instructions are available. 4. Request written information to supplement any auditory information. 5. As often as possible, ask that others present information sequentially, especially if more than one person is providing the information. For example, instead of “Before you watch TV, can you walk the dog and take out the trash?” ask others to say, “Can you walk the dog, take out the trash, and then sit down to watch TV?” 6. Ask if I do not understand or if I have missed something. Be as open as possible about communication. 7. Repeat what I have heard to clarify that I have understood. If I have heard part of the message but not the whole, I need to repeat the information I did hear while asking for clarification of the information I missed. For example, if a person says, “The elephant is sitting on the sofa in the living room,” and I hear only the part about the elephant, I need to say, “The elephant is sitting where?” If I hear only the part about the sofa in the living room, I can say, “What did you say about the sofa in the living room?” I sometimes find it a challenge to put these kinds of strategies into play. I’ve spent so many years covering up my difficulties and guessing at what people are saying that it’s been an adjustment to switch to words like, “I don’t know. Could you clarify?” But it’s been an immense relief to find out that my difficulties are due to a difference in the ways that I hear sound rather than absent-mindedness, or lack of intelligence, or just plain not caring—all false explanations with which I’ve bludgeoned myself over the years. I simply have a different way of hearing. It’s much easier to ask for help with a difference than with a moral failing. At least, it is for me. Learning about Alternative Communication Technologies Many alternative communication strategies for those of us with hearing difficulties are based on visual media. Because I don’t know American Sign Language (ASL), my current preferred methods of alternative communication are text-based. Text Relay Service Because using the telephone often entails dealing with degraded sound and a very fast rate of speech, I have great difficulty using the telephone effectively. Since obtaining my own teletypewriter (TTY) number and discovering the Text Relay Service (TRS), however, I’ve regained the ability to make all of my own phone calls. With my own TTY number, I can call any telephone number and communicate by means of a text relay operator. Using software on my computer, I type my part of the conversation. The relay operator speaks my words to the person at the other end and then types the person’s response for me. This service is wonderful and has allowed me to make phone calls without difficulty, struggle, and stress. And best of all, it’s free. I obtained a TTY number for use on my computer through NexTalk at www.nextalk.net. It took me a while to receive the number and have it activated, but I was able to begin making outgoing calls without it. In addition, one can immediately obtain a TTY number through Purple Communications’ IP-Relay at www.ip-relay.com for use on a computer, iPhone, or iPod Touch. I find that text messaging on my Blackberry is good for leaving short messages. If I want to have a longer conversation, I use NexTalk. If someone calls when I’m online, I hear the ringtone on my computer, and the NexTalk screen appears. If I’m not online, the caller can leave a voicemail message, which I receive by email. Text-to-Text Devices When I find myself in a place with a laptop and a wireless connection, Skype is a great way to communicate in a text-to-text fashion. However, in situations in which a wireless connection is not available, and I need to carry on an extended conversation with ambient sound, multiple people, or large amounts of information, I use SComm’s Ubi-Duo, a portable text-to-text device consisting of two consoles with their own wireless connection. So far, I have used the Ubi-Duo for long appointments at my doctor’s office and at my attorney’s office, with great results. You can even save the text of each conversation; my doctor finds this feature very helpful, because I can print the entire content of our appointment, and she doesn’t need to take notes. Using Visual Strategies to Sequence Tasks The visual and text-based strategies that I use to deal with my auditory processing condition represent just one way in which I use my visual sense to work around my challenges. Becoming aware of how much I rely on my visual sense to hear made me realize how much I need to rely on it for other difficulties. When I first began to understand the positive and negative sides of Asperger’s, I began to see that I have trouble sequencing simple tasks in real time. I’d never before thought that I had this difficulty, because I’ve always done a very good job with planning, sequencing, and executing complex tasks, such as goal setting, project management, scheduling, and meeting deadlines. I used to work full time and homeschool, and I kept up with all of my commitments quite well. I never had a problem designing our curriculum or articulating our educational goals well in advance of the deadlines. I always got all of the materials to the school district early. We consistently finished our curriculum well before the end of the school year, and I always got my daughter to her lessons on time. At work, I never missed a deadline, I was never late for a meeting, and I was always known as someone who kept all my tasks well planned and well organized. At home, I was never late on a bill, and I kept daily track of the amount of money in our accounts. Take any portion of my life, and it comes out looking much the same. Even when I was working minimum-wage jobs, living in a state of extreme sensory overload, and spending much of my time dazed and confused, I always paid my rent on time, got to my appointments early, and made sure my bills were paid well before their due dates. In my whole life, I’ve bounced only one check, and that happened about thirty years ago. And yet, when I consider cooking a meal with more than one course, I feel paralyzed. I’m perfectly capable of making simple, flavorful, nutritious meals with proteins, grains, fruits, and vegetables, but I’ve never considered trying to make a multi-course meal in which everything has to come out of the oven and off the stove at the same time. Of course, I have no interest in cooking a multi-course meal, because it’s best for my health when I eat simply, but just thinking about it feels like a monumental task. Every time I do, I feel as though I’m asking myself to move an object twice my weight up a steep hill. My immediate thought is, “Nah. Never mind that.” And then I think about something more pleasant. And then there are the simple decisions: Should I go shopping or do the laundry? Should I make a food list or clean the house? Which should I do first? Which should I do second? I used to feel paralyzed in the midst of those questions. For a while, I pondered the question of why I’d always been able to plan and sequence complex tasks, but struggled so much with simple ones. And then, finally, it came to me: for complex tasks, I’ve always written things down. Always. I never wanted to keep too much in my mind at once, and it always gave me great comfort to know that the steps to carrying out a seemingly gargantuan task could actually fit on a single piece of paper. But simple tasks? Well, they’re so simple. Why should I need to write them down in sequence? What I’ve come to realize is that I can plan, sequence, and carry out any tasks in time when I write them down and make them visual. Then they’re no longer just tasks in time; they’re actually objects in space—and I can organize objects in space like nobody’s business. Based on this revelation, I’ve discovered three main ways of turning the things of time into the things of space: 1. Lists. Lists, lists, lists. Not too many lists, because that gets overwhelming, but enough lists so that I can keep my tasks separate and manageable. Unless the task is very complex, once I write something down, I don’t forget it, and the list becomes nearly obsolete. If I can see it in print, it becomes, well, imprinted in my memory. I never have to worry about it. Some of the lists I keep I use not to remind myself of what to do, but to instruct myself to do it even when I don’t feel like it. Others contain numeric and other kinds of information that no one could hold in mind all at once. So, at the moment, I have the following lists that I keep updated: •Bank, credit card, and other accounts. •Food we need to buy at the grocery store. •Miscellaneous tasks that come to mind when I’m doing something else. I keep a “scribble list” on my Blackberry for these kinds of tasks. •Tasks I need to complete over the course of a week (household chores, bill paying, food shopping, and so on). Most of these tasks are intuitive at this point, but I keep a list so that I have an anchor if something gets thrown off. I use the calendar program on my Blackberry to schedule these tasks, and I generally don’t plan to do more than one or two each day. However, I can be flexible if life throws me a curveball because everything is there in black and white, and I don’t have to worry about losing track or feeling overwhelmed. 2. My calendar program. Oh, sacred calendar program! Where would I be without you? Excuse me for talking to the calendar program on my Blackberry as though it were a god. I know that I shouldn’t be quite so in awe of it, but I am. I’m in awe of the fact that I can hold an entire year’s worth of time in my hands and open up to the middle of it, whenever I want, without becoming disoriented. In my calendar program, I write down appointments, soccer games, school events, tax payments, special errands, and chores. And if life interrupts my plans, the Blackberry makes it easy to reschedule tasks that need to be put off for another day. 3. Leaving things where I can see them. My mantra is If my eyes can see it, I will remember it. If I have a book, or an item of clothing, or a DVD that I want to give to someone, I put it out where I can see it, and I write a reminder on my Blackberry to give it to the person. In order to remember to take my herbs and vitamins, I put them in a small pouch and leave it on my chair at the dinner table. That way, in order to sit down to eat, I have to pick up the pouch, and then I remember to take what’s in it. I do the same sort of thing with my nighttime herbs and medicine: I put them on a shelf where I’m sure to see them. So how did I figure out these visual strategies? Well, I’m very fortunate in that I love to organize things, large and small. Organizing soothes me and gives me a sense of accomplishment, two things that I’ve needed from the time I was small. And then, of course, I grew up before there was an Asperger’s diagnosis and, like many of us, found myself out on the open sea without a compass. So, I invented the best compass I could and I came up with a host of very good ideas about how to navigate. Many people with Asperger’s have done the same. And finally, growing up in a violent and dysfunctional family meant that I could either chart my own course or go down with the ship. Early on, I looked at my parents and thought, “These people are chaos. I’d better get myself organized.” And I did. Such are the blessings that one brings out of disaster. So about that complex multi-course meal? Yes, I could make one, but only if I sat back for a while and wrote everything down, and figured out when I needed to start making each course, and what time I needed to put each course in the oven/on the boil/in the saucepan, and what time I needed to take each course out of the oven/off the boil/out of the saucepan, and which area of preparation I needed to interrupt in order to begin (or resume) another area of preparation, and so on, and so on, and so on—until everything was written down in five-minute intervals, and I had mapped out each and every step in detail. But when it comes to actually doing it? Nah. Never mind that. Freeing Up Energy: Developing My Sense of Direction Using visual strategies for sequencing tasks and creatively adapting to my hearing condition have both freed up a great deal of energy. In particular, because I’ve learned to block my hearing and take auditory breaks, my other senses have calmed down considerably. All the energy I used to use for parsing and defending against auditory phenomena can now be put to more practical and enjoyable uses. I’ve discovered a visual acuity that I’d never known I had. I am not nearly so sensitive to light touch. I look forward to going into stores and spending time with people. And, in a most unexpected turn of events, my sense of direction has improved dramatically. For most of my life, I’d always considered myself to have a poor sense of direction. Actually, poor doesn’t really describe it. It was more a feeling of having been born without any sense of direction at all. I used to say that if I think I should go left, I should go right—except for those few times that I should go left. When I was young, I got lost in some of the great cities of Europe. When I got older, I got lost on rural Massachusetts back roads and interstate highways. But that was then, and this is now. In mid-life, I have begun developing a sense of direction. I first noticed this phenomenon when I was taking a walk through the woods. It had taken me a long time to venture into the woods at all, even though the trails are well marked. In the summer of 2010, I began by walking straight into the woods for a quarter mile or so, and then walking straight back out. Over time, I ventured onto the same winding trail, over and over, even when parts of it weren’t marked at all. Then, in the fall of 2010, I decided that I wanted to ramble into unknown territory. A number of trails criss-cross one another, and I figured, “Well, even if I get lost, it’s not as though I’m going to end up in New Hampshire. I won’t even make it out of Brattleboro.” So I rambled. At one point, I took a byway I’d never taken, and then I did something I’d never done before: I stopped and oriented myself. I could tell just where I was— which side of town I was facing, which familiar path was parallel to mine, and which way I had to go to make a circle and get back. And sure enough, when I was done, I came out just where I’d thought I would. I was astonished. As I meditated on this new achievement, I realized that a large part of my success was due to the fact that I was alone. When I’m walking with my husband or with a friend, I’m usually talking and listening, which necessitates all of my attention. I have to focus so much to decode what the other person is saying and to articulate what I want to say, that I cannot pay attention to where I am. For this reason, I usually get in the habit of going on a path I know well; if I’m familiar with the path, I don’t have to pay much attention to it and can converse all I like. If I’m unfamiliar with the path and can’t pay attention to it because I’m conversing, I have to depend on the other person to orient me. I don’t much like depending on other people to tell me where I am, so I don’t tend to explore new routes with others. And until that day in the woods, I’d never explored them myself. It was very empowering to realize that I could do it. Then, in mid-September, my new-found confidence was put to the test: I drove to my daughter’s soccer game in Putney, a 15-minute drive up the highway from Brattleboro. I hadn’t been on the highway in a year, and I had never been to the school where the soccer match was taking place. However, directions in hand, I made my way. At one point, I went the wrong way, but that was because the directions were unclear; the instructions said to follow a left-hand fork when, in fact, I should have taken a left-hand turn. As soon as I realized my mistake, I headed back to a gas station, asked directions, and found my way just fine. As it turned out, my daughter’s team bus had gone the wrong way too, and for exactly the same reason. Then, a couple of weeks later, I had a bit of an adventure. I drove to a therapeutic horseback riding school in Keene, NH. I found my way to my lesson without any trouble, but on the way back, I took a wrong turn. It was at one of those highway forks with five different road signs, and I hadn’t thought in advance which fork to take. Unfortunately, I took the wrong one. I realized my mistake immediately, took a deep breath, and said, “Okay. Just take the next exit and find your way back.” As it turned out, it wasn’t quite that simple, but I made it to the middle of Keene and decided to look for ways to head south. After a couple of miles, I could see that I wasn’t getting anywhere, so I turned and headed in another direction. The whole time, I was thinking about how nice it would have been to have a map of the area, and maybe an iPod to access MapQuest—but I didn’t have either one, so I decided to look for a gas station. As I was looking, it occurred to me that if I continued heading out of town, I’d find a state highway. And so I did. I headed out of town and found NH-12 South. I kept following the signs until I was back on the right road. So, even though I took a wrong turn and went out of my way for a while, I found my way back without any tears, fears, or self-deprecating thoughts. By the time I got home, it was as though I’d never taken a year-long break from the road. That’s how confident I felt. In the midst of my difficulties, I had begun to discover a new-found freedom. On Difficulty and Disability Difficulty is not a welcome concept in our culture. And yet, it’s a fact of life that I’ve had to accept—and sometimes welcome—in order to constructively adapt to life with a disability. For me, feeling perpetually crushed by the weight of a difficulty is not an option. Lightening the burden of a difficulty by accepting it and strategizing accordingly is the only way for me to proceed. In American society, everything is supposed to be easy. We have commercials that promise us a life of comfort. All we have to do is buy the right recliner, drive the right car, follow the right weight-loss program, or purchase the right labor-saving devices. The most valued people in our culture are young and able-bodied because, let’s face it, life only gets more difficult with age or disability. The difficulties I face in life are physical as well as social. As much as I value who I am, I am not one to say that my auditory disability is physically easy; add in the constant necessity of self-advocacy and the frequent experience of exclusion from restaurants, stores, and workplaces that are too loud for me to tolerate, and I’ve got a life that doesn’t come close to the ideal of ease and comfort that every advertisement tries to sell me. But it’s a lie that life is supposed to be easy. For a great many people, all over the world, it isn’t and never has been. I’m coming to feel that this lie, in and of itself, is responsible for a great deal of the struggles that disabled people face. While I’ve had the unbelievable privileges that come with being white, American, middle class, and educated, I’ve also had my share of hard times. For most of my life, I’ve gotten through the hard times by thinking, “Well, next year (or when I graduate/get married/have a baby/buy a house), life will be easier.” Sometimes, it has gotten easier, but sometimes, life just feels plain difficult. My hearing condition takes a lot of energy, a lot of discipline, and a lot of work. It is what it is. There is no changing it. I have to stay with what is. I am much more in the present moment than I have ever been, simply doing the work that needs to be done. But sometimes, I still catch myself thinking, “What the hell happened? Life is supposed to be easier.” And trust me when I say that thoughts of how life is supposed to be make the life one is actually living so much more difficult. The dissonance between the ideal and the real is both draining and painful. Life is difficult for most people on the planet. In the rich countries, we get desensitized to this fact—partly because we’re promised a “happily ever after,” and partly because a lot of people in the rich countries actually have it pretty good a great deal of the time. So, because many folks don’t see the kinds of lives that most people live, they become unfamiliar with the idea that life is full of harsh and painful things. And when they come up against those harsh and painful things, they panic, because nothing has prepared them for the inevitable storm. I’ve come to understand that one of the primary reasons that disabled people are so ostracized and excluded in our society is that we remind everyone that life is a messy, fragile, difficult thing. Our very existence flies in the face of the myth that, with the right combination of hard work, positive thinking, willpower, and possessions, life becomes what it’s “supposed” to be: safe, easy, and fair. Our interruption of the cultural myth is one of the reasons that all disabled people, at one time or another, have the experience of feeling invisible, even when in plain sight. It also explains why our attempts at inclusion are met with everything from good intentions that miss the mark to the mind-boggling experience of outright hostility. If you weren’t born with a disability, but you live long enough, aging is sure to take you out of the camp of the typically able-bodied. Dealing with that change, at an advanced age, can be very hard. For the past few years, my husband has been going down to New York City on a regular basis to visit and care for his dad. At 95, his dad is fortunate to be able to live in his own apartment, but as the years have gone by, he has lost more and more of his ability to do the things he’s always done. These days, he is physically very frail and requires a great deal of assistance. Every time Bob visits, he hears his father’s constant refrain: “I’ve lived a charmed life. It wasn’t supposed to end up this way.” I understand his feelings. I really do. Despite all the work I’ve done, I’ve heard those words coming from deep inside me, too. In these past several years, I’ve said to myself many times: “This is not how things are supposed to be.” So many of us are unprepared for the harsh realities. In many ways, I’m lucky to be struggling with these realities in my 50s and finding the inner spiritual, physical, and emotional resources to deal with them. I think that it would be much harder to face them, for the first time in my life, in my 90s. I’m fortunate to be learning that, while it’s a long road from pursuing ease to grappling with difficulty, it’s also a long road from life being difficult to things being impossible. There is a pervasive tendency in our culture to elide the two, as though any difficulty is simply out of the question. From this confusion of the difficult with the impossible comes the trope of the “inspiring cripple” (and its counterpart, the “inspiring caretaker”). It’s as though typical people look at us and think, “Oh, you are so inspiring! If that were me, I would find it impossible!” In response to this kind of thinking, I just want to shout, “No, no, no! Difficult is not the same as impossible!” The two may look like the same thing to an outside observer; the two may even feel like the same thing in most people’s experience. But most of the time, they are not the same thing. Not even close. Chapter 5 Adventures in Self-Advocacy To be nobody but yourself—in a world which is doing its best, night and day, to make you like everybody else—means to fight the hardest battle which any human being can fight, and never stop fighting. — E.E. Cummings As I’ve developed my ability to self-advocate, building a strong sense of self has been crucial. Doing so has not only made self-advocacy possible, but has also enhanced my self-esteem and my sense of power. Developing a positive sense of self has been a lifelong process. It began with my recovery from the violence I endured in childhood, and has continued with my ongoing struggle against the language of deficit and impairment in the mainstream autism discourse. By building a strong sense of self, I’ve become better able to advocate for my needs, and my ability to engage the world on issues affecting disabled people has grown considerably. Chasing Away Childhood Demons Abuse was a core element of my childhood. The violence was not constant, but neither was it far from view. I was emotionally abused throughout my childhood. I was also physically abused from the time I was 4 until I was 19, and sexually abused from the time I was 11 until I was 19. The abuse stopped after I fled the scene, moving 3,000 miles away to California. I no longer have any relationship with anyone in my original family, as my blood relations are either in denial or don’t care. I want to say outright that I don’t have any kind of hierarchy in my mind about which form of abuse is “worse,” because for me, the only important dividing line is the one that separates being safe from being unsafe. For a long while, ranking one kind of abuse as worse than another became an exercise in minimizing and controlling my pain, and it was a great relief to stop. I gave myself permission to stop, over 20 years ago, after sitting in a support group with a woman who was actively recovering memories of the most hideous abuse imaginable. Each of us got a session in which to tell our stories, and when this woman told hers, everyone else in the group responded with a variation of, “I feel as though I don’t even have the right to be sitting here with you. My abuse wasn’t nearly as awful as yours.” Her mindful, compassionate, and altogether accurate answer was, “There is no such thing as better or worse when it comes to abuse. Once someone forces us to cross that line, we’re all in this together.” One aspect of her struggle that we all shared was the visceral sense that the abuser had somehow taken up residence in our minds, our hearts, and even in the cells of our bodies. Particularly regarding the sexual abuse, I felt that I would never be able to rid myself of the way it pervaded my awareness of my own being. For a long time, I felt as though the abuse were circulating through my body and that with every beat of my heart, it was making me feel dirty and broken. How could I possibly heal? How could I possibly keep up with the messages of self-hatred that were spreading inside me? How could I tackle them quickly enough to defuse their power? Having been born with a very healthy sense of outrage, I was very, very angry that the ugly messages seemed to have become an inextricable part of me, and I rebelled against them even when I felt utterly done in by them. As it turned out, rebelling against them helped me see that the belief that I had been dirtied and broken was an illusion—that it was an idea, not a reality. I came to this understanding through teachings from my own culture about the purity of the human soul. I know that not every culture has these teachings, and I know that there are many paths to healing. This one just happens to be mine. Judaism teaches that we are each born with a pure soul, that we each die with a pure soul, and that nothing that comes between our first breath and our last breath can change our essential nature. At the core of this concept is the belief that when we are created, a spark of the Divine enters us and becomes the soul. Because the Divine can never be broken or made incomplete, the soul within us shares that indestructibility and wholeness. And so, whatever is done to our bodies, our souls are perfectly resilient and incorruptible. As I meditated on these things, I came to feel that much of the evil that was done to me consisted of making me forget that I am perfectly fine. I have struggles, yes, but I am not the same as what has happened to me, what has been done to me, and what has terrified me. At the core of my being, through all the pain and confusion that can sometimes cloud my path, I am separate from the storm, and I am perfectly whole. In these teachings, I found my connection to the Divine, not as a self-other relationship, but as a deepening sense of immanence, awareness, and shared existence. Meeting the Challenges of the Autism Discourse For many years, I thought I’d never again have to struggle against that sense of being compromised, broken, and wrong. Then, I got the Asperger’s diagnosis. After the initial rush of “Yay! That explains everything!” came the second wave of becoming profoundly aware of the language of impairment, disorder, deficit, and disease that permeates most conversations about autism. One of the most painful outcomes of my Asperger’s assessment was a profound change in my sense of how the world saw me. I realized that others might not view me as a regular human being anymore, but as a collection of impairments, a walking stereotype, a broken person. Of course, I hadn’t changed at all from the minute before my assessment to the minute after my assessment and yet, my sense of how the world saw me changed in significant ways. And so I began to struggle with my sense of myself all over again. I’m not sure that I can explain to someone who hasn’t been through it, or who hasn’t watched a loved one go through it, the devastating impact of the way that people can see autistics. The insistence on looking at us through the lens of deficit can be so extreme that we begin to see “deficit” as key to the definition of who we are. In the beginning, I certainly suffered from this distorted view of myself. I found my thoughts constantly moving in a negative direction: I have difficulties with eye contact: Deficit. I can’t read nonverbal cues: Deficit. I can’t do small talk: Deficit. I don’t lie: Deficit. I’m not indirect: Deficit. I like routine: Deficit. I depend upon my lists: Deficit. I stim: Deficit. And on. And on. And on. The result was depression, low self-esteem, and feelings of despair. In my worst moments, I felt like a piece of Swiss cheese, recognizable only by what wasn’t there. So, what did I do to find my way back to a sense of wholeness? I started self-advocating—with myself—by looking at my strengths, and I began to critique the larger cultural context. However, the truly mind- bending result was that once I had the Asperger’s label, even my strengths started looking like deficits: I’m gifted at discerning patterns and organizing the objects of space: Those are just splinter skills. I can focus like a laser beam on any task: I am inflexible. I am good with the written word: I’m overcompensating for my difficulties with verbal communication. I have a keen eye for hypocrisy: I just don’t understand the usefulness of social forms. I value my nonconformity: I just don’t understand the usefulness of social forms. I’m very good at discussing subjects of mutual interest: I just don’t understand the usefulness of social forms. I express empathy by asking what a person needs from me and then doing it: I just don’t understand the usefulness of social forms. And on. And on. And on. At some point, my healthy sense of outrage began kicking in, and I began taking back my power over how I see myself. So, in addition to reclaiming my strengths as actual strengths, I began reclaiming my so-called “deficits” as actual strengths, too. I started to listen more closely to the sound of my own voice, my own thoughts, and my own experience. And here is what came clearly to mind: I have difficulties with eye contact because I am so sensitive to the information coming at me from a person’s eyes. I can’t read nonverbal cues because I am so sensitive to the fullness of a person’s energy. I can’t do small talk because I’m sincere. I don’t lie because I’m ethical (although I will keep quiet when it is not in my best interest to disclose the truth). I’m not indirect because life is short and there is much to be done. I like routine because I’m an organized person. I make lists because I’m responsible and don’t ever want to forget to do anything that someone, somewhere, might be depending upon me to do. I stim because the world is a pretty noisy, chaotic place full of highly irrational people and, sometimes, I need a little soothing. It’s a lot of work to have to continually fight the battle against the impact of the autism discourse, but here’s the way I look at it: If all that someone can see are all the things I can’t do and all the things I’m not, rather than all the things I can do and all the things I am, I’m not sure I can do a thing about it except to refuse to participate. That’s when I return to the pivotal moment on my healing path: I have a pure soul. If there is one thing that is pervasive, that touches everything I do, it’s the spark of the Divine in me, and that spark is far more powerful and far more valuable and far more sacred than anything else. If all that someone can use to describe me is the language of deficit, disorder, and impairment, that’s the other person’s illusion, not mine. I don’t have to take it on, and I won’t. All I can do is to stay clear in my mind that a society that defines people by what they can’t do is a society with a pervasive problem. Defending My Psyche: On Doubt and the Doubters Most of us who discover our place on the spectrum later in life go through a period of self-doubt. I certainly did. During this period, I found that it was crucial to defend my psyche from those who would seek to inflame my doubt. Doing so became an necessary form of self-advocacy. At the beginning of my journey, I thought, “Well, I fit the criteria, and I identify with the experience of other autistic people, and it explains just about everything about my life. But…but…but…really? Me?” Once I received the Asperger’s diagnosis, I experienced a combination of euphoria (“At last! I’ve found my kin! And a Unified Theory of Me!”) and extreme self-doubt (“But if I passed for typical this long, can I really be autistic?”). It would have been lovely if others could have left me alone to deal with my doubts in peace. But, of course, that would be asking too much. To make a life-changing moment even more fun, enter the doubters. I have run across many different types of doubters. Some are well-intentioned people who, upon hearing that I have Asperger’s, apparently feel the need to cheer me up. They say things like, “You’re not autistic. You’re just quirky and shy!” Others try to make me feel good by telling me that I don’t seem odd: “But you seem so normal! You can’t possibly be autistic.” And slightly more diplomatic folks say things to me like, “Are you sure? After all, you’re happily married. With children. And you can write. And speak. And have insights!” It all gets very tiring. And then, of course, there are the nasties—the ones on the Internet who call people like me (who can write, speak, choose their friends, carry on a relationship, work a job, make a video, raise children, and live independently) “fake autistics.” I find the ignorance and meanness of this kind of talk appalling. I understand that people are angry, stressed, sad, and overwhelmed for any number of reasons, but how can anyone make such pronouncements? The criteria that such people are using are not a reasonable basis for a diagnosis, to put it mildly, and carrying out diagnostic assessments on complete strangers over the Internet is not exactly a responsible practice. One of the ways that I originally sought to resolve my doubts—and to get other people to stop questioning me—was by getting an official diagnosis. I got diagnosed very early in the process of discovering Asperger’s, and it was very liberating to have a third party listen to me and validate my perceptions. In fact, when I tried to thank the specialist who diagnosed me, he said, “You really don’t need to thank me. You’d already used your insight to figure it out before you walked in the door.” Did the diagnosis remove all my nagging doubts? No. It went a long way, but it didn’t erase all doubt immediately. I had too many stereotypes of autism in my head to root out, and I had to recover from way too many years of minimizing my difficulties. I needed to integrate my new understanding into my sense of myself before I felt completely sure. It was a process. And certainty took a while to arrive. But even with my diagnosis in hand, I’ve found that the doubts expressed by others often refuse to go away. There are people who call autism the “diagnosis du jour.” There are people who will never understand that some things cannot be overcome by will power. There is really no end to the things that people will say, and having an invisible disability just compounds the problem. After all, for the most part, I look for all the world like a typically able-bodied person. I look just like the people doing the doubting. If I look like them, they think, how could I not be like them, think like them, experience the world like them? They think that what they literally see before their eyes is the whole picture. Unfortunately, there are no proven treatments for this kind of denial. There are only self-advocacy measures to employ in the face of it: 1. Answer back briefly and only when necessary. A while ago, I read a piece by a disabled woman about how she responds to people staring her down when she parks in a handicapped space. When they see her walk out of her car and say to her, “But you don’t look disabled,” she says, “And you don’t look like a doctor!” I’ve begun to answer the doubt and denial that comes my way with a similar response: “Yes, I’m sure that I’m autistic. Thank you for asking, though.” 2. Figuratively refer the doubter to the diagnostician. For those who want to question whether I’m autistic (and, by implication, whether everyone like me is autistic), I have at the ready the following statement: “If you don’t believe me, please take it up with the specialist who diagnosed me. I really don’t want to spend any time on the subject.” For me, being able to mentally offload the question onto the diagnostician has been a major, unexpected benefit of having an official diagnosis. 3. Understand why doubt can settle in and feel so upsetting. Many of us, because we’ve lived with a great deal of social rejection over a number of years, can develop something called “reactive depression.” One of the hallmarks of this kind of depression is a tendency to be extremely self-critical and apologetic. So when someone says, “You’re not really autistic,” it can set off a chain reaction in which the first response can be “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to take up too much space, or to ask for too much attention, or to take myself too seriously. Maybe I really ought to examine this whole thing again and, oh my, I apologize to have bothered you at all.” Then, another loop begins of “Am I or am I not?” The doubts of others don’t inflame doubts in me anymore, mainly because I can tell the difference between a question that triggers an old, unhealthy response and a question that signals that I seriously ought to look at something. Questions about whether I am who I say I am generally don’t fall into the category of questions I need to look at, and so I’m always aware that they’re simply triggering. 4. Be clear about the ethics of the situation. Unless it’s in the context of official paperwork, it’s ethically wrong to ask me to prove my disability. It puts me in the position of explaining myself, over and over. It feeds the energy of the doubters, it gives away my power, and it distracts me from the process of simply living my life. Moreover, it’s absolutely unethical, in the extreme, to inflame self-doubt in a person who has already been rejected enough to have self-doubt be an habitual, destructive response. Some people don’t know they’re triggering this response and, I’ve found, these people need to be gently told to end their line of questioning. Others are simply lashing out and are only too happy to trigger a whole series of unhappy reactions. Those who do so need to be told, in no uncertain terms, to stop—and that can mean simply walking away and refusing to engage. 5. Break old habits. I’ve learned that I don’t have to let the chain reaction of self-doubt, explanation, and apology happen over and over. It’s just a habit. Habits can be broken. Clearly, the whole question of how to talk back to doubt and denial will always be a work in progress, but describing the problem and brainstorming solutions has been very strengthening. Since I’ve moved out of the mode of explaining and into the mode of strategizing about how to deflect the doubts and keep moving on, I’ve experienced a great deal more self-respect and happiness. Protecting Myself in a World of Guile Part of self-advocacy, I have discovered, is learning to protect and defend myself from being taken advantage of by others. Many of us with Asperger’s are very honest and straightforward people. Long before I was diagnosed, I set my mind to the task of navigating a world in which honesty does not, shall we say, always play a major role. It’s perhaps a sad commentary on our world that being honest and without guile is considered evidence of disability, but adapting to this world is a necessity. While being straightforward has cost me social points at various times in my life, it’s also engendered trust in friends and colleagues, and I value my honesty very highly. My biggest challenges have revolved around the mistaken assumption that other people are as honest as I am. In the world in which we live, too much trust can have negative consequences. Over the course of my life, I’ve figured out many ways to protect myself. Some strategies came to me very early on, and others became clear only after life had dealt me some harsh experiences. All of them demand that I use my intelligence, my resourcefulness, and my blunt honesty to stand up for myself. I’ll share my lessons learned: 1. Beware of those who want to separate me from my money. A person who wants to separate me from my money is interested in my money first and in my welfare second (or not at all). Now, I realize that I’m overstating here, since a therapist, for instance, may care equally about me and about getting paid. Proven exceptions aside, I don’t think it does any harm to take the rule as axiomatic. I began living out this approach fairly early on, care of my father, who was quite suspicious of people’s motives when it came to money. As a result, I’ve never been scammed, not even as a very innocent and overwhelmed young woman. Getting older has only made me more cautious about money and, while I may be overly cautious at times, too much caution has never done me any harm and is infinitely preferable to an overabundance of trust. 2. Reduce my attachment to material goods. Reducing my attachment to material goods protects me against buying things that someone tells me I absolutely must have in order to be happy, strong, safe, attractive, or loved. I figured out this one pretty early on as well. I’m very fortunate that I am just as happy looking at beautiful things in a shop window as in my own home. Moreover, I must have been a scavenger in a past life, because most of what I own comes from thrift stores and free boxes. At my age, I have what I need and, frankly, I’m more concerned with keeping my living space free of clutter and saving as much money as possible for my daughter, stepchildren, and godson to inherit. As a result, I have an absolute aversion to anyone peddling objects of desire mislabeled as necessities. People who try are wasting their breath on me. 3. Trust my intuition. I may not be able to use nonverbal cues to modulate a conversation, but my intuition about people is excellent. When an unsafe person walks into a room, I feel it viscerally. It’s an aspect of my acute sensitivity that I value highly. I have been in situations in which I knew a person was unsafe, but everyone else was oblivious. Months or years later, the person showed his true colors, and everyone asked, “How could we have known?” My only response was “How could you not have known?” 4. When something doesn’t add up, move on. Quickly. Along with my baseline intuition, I’ve learned to trust my perceptions when I’m faced with a person whose sales pitch or sad personal story just doesn’t seem to hold together. My logical mind comes in very handy here, because many folks rely on their charming personalities to put one over on people and aren’t paying much attention to the logical consistency of what they’re saying and doing. It always surprises me when someone tries to charm me, because my attention is nearly always focused on understanding the logic of what the person is saying, even when the logic is absent or faulty. As a result, I can usually pick out the hidden flaw and I don’t just pass it off and try to forget about it. I pay attention to it. 5. Depend on what people do rather than on what they say. It’s taken me many, many years to learn this lesson. Words are cheap. Actions are telling. Although my first inclination is to believe what someone tells me (after all, doesn’t it just complicate things to lie?), I’ve realized that my impulse toward honesty is not an impulse that most people share, and I step back. Way, way back. So, when someone says, “Hey, let’s get together,” I don’t get happy and excited about it until we actually get together. If someone says, “I really care about you,” I don’t get all warm and fuzzy about it until the person actually does something to show his or her care for me. Until I figured out that words are only as good as the actions that back them up, I let my emotions get pulled all over the place by the things that other people wrote or said. As you can imagine, my life is much more serene these days. Requesting Accommodations: Lessons Learned on Vacation For our eighth wedding anniversary, my husband and I stayed at an inn on the coast of Maine and, during that visit, I learned a number of important lessons about advocating for myself and requesting accommodations for my disability. In so doing, I found a great deal of self-confidence and power. The inn was wonderful: great food, beautiful rooms, friendly staff, and a large common area with a fireplace. My husband and I had agreed that we should be prepared to make adjustments in order to keep my auditory system happy, including eating in our room if the staff couldn’t find us a quiet place to sit in the restaurant. We had decided that the point was to spend the time together and that we’d have a good time, no matter what. We hadn’t gone on vacation in years, so we were determined to have a good experience. And we did have a fun time, but it took some doing. Ultimately, we had an even better time than I’d hoped for, and I learned a lot along the way about self-advocacy. When we checked in, my husband explained that I have hearing difficulties and that we would need a quiet place to have our meals. The nice young man at the check-in desk said, “There are only two other couples here tonight, so that shouldn’t be a problem.” That was promising. When we went to the restaurant for dinner, my husband explained that we needed them to turn the music down if we were going to be able to be there. What he meant was “off,” but what he said was “down,” and I didn’t bother to clarify. Of course, I should have said, “In order to be here, I need you to turn the music off completely. Would you do that for me?” Doing so would have simplified things by getting to the heart of the matter and eliciting a yes or no response. But I didn’t feel confident enough to risk a refusal. Instead, I lapsed into the denial of “Well, it never actually works for me to converse in a place with music playing, but maybe this time, it will.” That was my first mistake. The person who seated us did not understand. She tried to get us to sit at the far end of the restaurant, away from the speakers, which didn’t help, since the room was quite small. As I walked across the room, my ears weren’t picking up any difference in sound whatsoever. So I said, “I need you to turn the music down in order for us to stay.” She said she would. We waited: one minute, two minutes, three minutes. Still nothing. When she came by again, she said, “So, how is that?” I was rather taken aback, but I was still in good enough shape to say, “I’m sorry. I haven’t noticed any change in the volume of the music.” When she registered what I’d said, she looked at me as though she expected me to back down. I didn’t. I just kept looking at her. And then my husband chimed in with, “Could you please turn the music down?” Unfortunately, that’s when the woman said, “No, that’s all I can do,” in a tone of voice that would have been more appropriately applied to the statement, “I’m so glad you’re enjoying your meal. Let me know what else I can do for you.” Nonverbal cues are not my forte, but I’m a classically trained musician, and I can read vocal tones very well. The waitress’ tone was so inappropriate to her words that it was unnerving. My heart was steadily dropping toward my shoes, and believe me when I say that I really needed to work on that response. It didn’t help at all. And here’s where I made my second mistake: I really wanted to say something more, but all I could feel was “What’s the use?” and I let that feeling win. And for my husband’s sake, I decided to stay. So, I put my earplugs in, and doing so made the music recede quite nicely. Of course, I had trouble hearing my husband, and had to ask him to get close to my face and repeat himself, so it was very tiring. Once the food was served, we were able to begin our meal. There were only two other couples in the restaurant, and they were very soft-spoken, so I rationalized that things could always be worse. Of course, in the process, I completely ignored that I was doing way too much work for what should have been a relaxing dinner. And then, as if on cue, things got worse. The chef came out and started talking, in a loud voice, with the man at the table next to us. I could hear him quite clearly through my earplugs. And he went on for some time. I very badly wanted to ask him to lower his voice, but remaining silent to that point had already diminished my sense of power, and I didn’t feel comfortable about saying anything. Plus, my auditory system had long since started screaming, “Why the hell are you still in this room?” I was not exactly at my best. Failing to request that the chef quiet his voice was my third mistake. It only made me feel more disempowered. I found myself eating my meal very fast just to get out of there, and I left in short order. And worse, I was absolutely exhausted and miserable for the rest of the night. My stomach hurt, I felt nauseated, and every muscle in my body was tense. I was wiped out. When Bob got back to the room, we agreed to figure something else out for the next day. So, the next morning, he went to the restaurant manager and explained the situation. The outcome was very good. At breakfast, he learned that the music could be turned all the way off and, when he requested that the manager do so for his own comfort, she agreed. She told him that, for dinner that night, she would seat us in our own little area of the restaurant, with a door that would shut out the sound from the rest of the room. When we got there that night and found that no such arrangement had been made, my heart sank again, but when we inquired, the waitress said, “Oh, yes, we’ve had a change of plans. We’ve decided to serve everyone in the grille, and you can have the entire dining room all to yourself, without any music playing at all.” Can you imagine? The silence was so sweet. I was in heaven. We had a wonderful meal and ended up feeling very refreshed. And the next morning, they gave us our own little dining area for breakfast, away from music and conversation. So, when all was said and done, we had a wonderful time. We ate delicious food. We walked on the beach in a snowstorm. We sat by the fire and read. We watched movies. And we relaxed. When our stay was done, it was difficult to leave, but I felt better in my mind by the end of our time there than I’d felt in a long while. Putting Together a Self-Advocacy Checklist On the way home from Maine, my husband and I debriefed and, after some reflection, I put together the following checklist. It helps me to remember both the particulars of how to self-advocate and the mindset I need in order to continue doing so effectively. 1. Plan ahead of time. I cannot wait until I show up at a place before I explain my situation and negotiate what I need. So, for example, before we go on our next vacation, I’m going to write a letter to the manager wherever we stay, explaining the accommodations I need and getting agreement on what they will provide. Even if I show up and they don’t give me the accommodations right away, I’ve got a basis on which to proceed without having to start from scratch. I can take out my letter and say, “I explained the situation in advance of coming, and you agreed to make accommodations before I arrived. So, how can we make the situation work?” 2. Do not try to be in an environment that does not work. I cannot sit in a restaurant with music playing and expect to converse. I cannot filter out the sound when people in another part of the room are talking and their voices are carrying. It does not work. Those days are over. I’ve been learning this lesson, over and over, in all kinds of ways. I end up in pain, pure and simple. If I’m by myself and the room isn’t too loud, blocking my hearing works more or less well. If I’m with someone else and want to converse, though, blocking my ears is beside the point. So why did I slip into denial at the restaurant in Maine? Why didn’t I ask for the music to be turned off? Why didn’t I say at the outset, “You know, I need a place away from music and conversation in order to enjoy my meal. Can you help me make that happen?” Why did I make these compromises that are so bad for my health? I wasn’t just avoiding confrontation. In the past, setting these limits has made me feel isolated and different. So, in order to avoid that feeling on our vacation, I put up with things that made me ill. But when the accommodations finally came through, I saw once again what was possible. 3. Increase the odds by making requests early and often. Self-advocating doesn’t mean that every place will become accessible to me, but I increase the odds considerably by politely asserting my right to be included and by trying to work with people to make that happen. After all, I don’t need to go out all the time. I’m on friendly terms with my solitude. But I would like to be able to go out once in a while and have it work. There are a couple of restaurants in town that seat us in quiet areas, away from ambient sound, where we can enjoy our meals. Even in my small town, I’ve gotten good results. I need to keep the possibilities firmly in mind, wherever I go. 4. Undo the cascade effect that begins with failing to ask. Once I let go of my power and back down in one instance, it gets that much harder to find my power again when I need to stand up in another instance. If I give in and say, “Okay, I’ll compromise in this one situation, even though it won’t be good for me,” it’s nearly impossible for me to meet the next situation and say, “Okay, that’s enough.” Instead, I just keep backtracking, and that only makes the situation worse. The key, I have found, is to speak to the situation, gently but persistently, from the outset, and then decide whether the accommodations offered will work. 5. Understand that self-advocacy is a lifelong, daily necessity. I hadn’t really wanted to face this fact before, but it really hit me full force during our short vacation. I hate risking confrontation and rejection face-to-face; so many of my adjustments to all of my disabilities have been along the lines of “Don’t mind me. I’ll manage.” That just isn’t going to work anymore because, in truth, with the auditory system I carry around, taking a “don’t mind me” approach only makes things worse. It would be like acceding to pulling myself by the arms down the street rather than using a wheelchair and insisting on curb cuts. My auditory processing condition may be an invisible disability, but that doesn’t make it any less in need of accommodation. 6. Self-advocacy includes allowing others to speak up in support. I’ve resisted this idea, because I always think that I should be able to do everything myself at all times, but that’s really based on an illusion. The fact is that no one does everything alone all the time. Everyone gets help. The help is often invisible, because the world is set up for typically able-bodied people, but a great deal of the time, nondisabled people get plenty of help. As long as I don’t give my power away to the person speaking on my behalf, or allow asking for assistance to make me feel less than powerful, or come to depend on someone else’s voice more than on my own, I’m fine. And if no one is there to speak on my behalf, I am fully capable of finding the inner strength to do it myself. I’ve been doing it more and more as I realize my right to be fully a part of this world. Practice makes perfect, and I am practicing, every day and in a myriad of ways. 7. Reduce the levels of worry and tension over the process. In short: Breathe, relax, and choose words carefully and to best effect. 8. Always say “Thank you.” It elevates everyone concerned to express appreciation for the accommodations that people provide, and doing so will only help the next disabled person who comes in the door. As soon as the employees at the inn began giving us quiet places to eat, I found myself looking for opportunities to let them know what an enjoyable time I was having. It’s not a difficult task to show appreciation. It’s quite simple, really. When we were seated in the dining room, away from the other guests, I said, “Thank you. This is just what I need.” When we were seated in a quiet area for breakfast and the waiter asked whether the situation was working for me, I said, “Absolutely. This is just perfect.” And when the restaurant manager asked us whether we were enjoying our stay, I said, “People here have been very helpful in working around my sensitivities to sound. It’s made all the difference in the world. I very much appreciate it.” Now, this course of action may sound like ordinary politeness—and perhaps it is—but I always feel myself walking a very fine line. On the one hand, I know that I have a right to inclusion. And so, I could just have sat there with a smug attitude that said, “I deserve this treatment. Why should I thank you?” And yet, it’s not in me to act that way. Yes, we all deserve inclusion, just as we all deserve love, friendliness, and beauty in our lives, but it does no harm to say “thank you” to the people who provide them. It’s good for the soul of the receiver and for the soul of the giver. On the other hand, saying “thank you” for accommodations can easily turn into a self-effacing apology for my needs, as though I’m getting a favor that I don’t deserve. It is all too easy to venture into the realm of “Thank you for giving me this special treatment,” or “I appreciate that you don’t mind my being such a bother,” or “It’s so nice of you not to get irritated by my request.” No. When asking for accommodations, there is no special treatment involved. What I’m asking for is equal access. And if a person is bothered or irritated by my respectful, persistent requests to be treated as an equal, I would count that as a very good thing. After all, in order for anything to change, people have to move outside their comfort zones and carve out new ones. Otherwise, they’ll never expand their ideas of what’s possible, what’s deserved, or what’s ethical. Perhaps the best way to express appreciation for accommodations is to say, “I want to acknowledge the way you accorded me respect and provided equal treatment. You did an excellent job.” To my mind, this type of statement increases one’s dignity and lets the other person know that he or she hasn’t just followed the law or provided good service. The person has engaged in an ethical, potentially life-changing moment for another human being. And by showing appreciation, I make it more likely that the person will provide accommodations to the next disabled individual who comes through the door. Advocating for Accommodations at Work In November of 2010, I began working as a proofreader at The Commons, our local weekly newspaper, for which I now serve as the copy editor. On Tuesday evenings in the winter of 2010, I went to the newsroom and proofed copy for the weekly production cycle. The people in the newsroom were friendly, welcoming, and witty. It was wonderful to be able to spend time with people who love the written word as I do, and I loved the feeling of being in the thick of things again. However, I soon began to realize that my auditory issues were making it difficult for me to concentrate with all the conversation and other sounds that are standard in a newspaper office. I was expending a great deal of energy navigating the auditory world, and I began to feel that I needed to find another environment in which to do my work. When I returned from Maine, I began to put my self-advocacy steps into effect by contacting the editor of the paper. I explained my auditory issues and I asked that we set up accommodations that would allow me to work from home. I requested the accommodations, with a confident and friendly tone, without being demanding, defensive, or apologetic. The result? The editor said that he’d be happy to work with me. After some discussion, he began emailing me PDF files of each section of the paper, which I could proof in Adobe Acrobat and return to him online. Now, throughout the week, I edit copy in Open Office from home and I check it in by means of the online editorial system. When I was a technical writer, telecommuting had been a great boon to my energy and my sense of accomplishment. It’s very satisfying to be able to work from home again. Disability Rights Activism: Acting for Others, Acting for Self I’ve come to believe that self-advocacy cannot only be about standing up for myself—for the simple reason that my life is inextricably linked with the lives of other disabled people. And so, I do my best to reach out to others on the autism spectrum, and I’ve begun developing a cross-disability perspective as well. By seeking to help strengthen and empower others, I’ve strengthened and empowered myself. Working with Others on the Autism Spectrum Early in 2011, I began a local group called the Southern Vermont Self-Advocacy Coalition (SVSAC). We are involved in autistic community building at the local level, sponsoring workshops to empower autistic teens and young adults, and providing monthly support meetings for adults on the spectrum. It’s been great to meet the young people coming up and to find how much we have in common. Speaking Out in My Local Community In addition to my work with people on the autism spectrum, I write pieces on disability issues for The Commons. Because my auditory difficulties make me unable to engage people in loud or crowded environments, I use my writing as a way to lift up my voice on issues that affect disabled people. Engaging with Severely Disabled Young People From my online contacts, I know that, even within the disability community, those dealing with severe disability can feel marginalized and invisible. And so I’ve begun to act on my keen interest in the needs of severely disabled people and their families by starting an online forum to make visible the issues affecting this part of the community. Each month, on my Journeys with Autism blog, I run a guest post for my Widening the Disability Perspective series. Thus far, I have run pieces by the family members of young people disabled by stroke, injury, cerebral palsy, and severe autism. It brings together my regular readers, who may only be familiar with the world of high-functioning autism, with those whose perspective is altogether different. In the course of getting to know these families, I began to feel a need to support the people in my local area who are dealing with severe disability. And so, I reached out to a friend who has many contacts in the community, and she put me in touch with a nonverbal young man with quadriplegic cerebral palsy. I’ve since befriended him and I see him every other Sunday for lunch and companionship. In addition, I have the privilege of being a personal care assistant to a sweet, beautiful four-year-old boy with multiple disabilities. I found the job by chance, through an online search, and realized that his parents had lived in the house that I live in now. And even more amazing? The little boy was born in the house—in fact, in the very room in which I am writing these words. It is a relationship that was meant to be—and it helps me to thrive. Chapter 6 Deconstructing Cultural Attitudes about Disability The worlds created by the human imagination are far more coherent and structured than the real social systems in which we live, and the mental constructs by which we make sense of society are only loosely related (sometimes inversely) to what is really going on. We take these conventional views of our social system as matter-of-fact, true representations of social reality, but they are socially constructed realities, human artifices whose purpose is to perpetuate society, not clarify it. — Robert Murphy Ableism is a set of beliefs and practices that rests on the assumption that being able-bodied is normal and that disabled people must either overcome the disability or be marginalized. In this view, disability is an impairment, a mistake, a failing, and a tragedy rather than simply a form of human diversity. The ableist worldview posits a standard of one’s self and one’s body that is considered “perfect, species-typical, and therefore essential and fully human,” with the result that disability is viewed as a “diminished state of being human.” (Campbell, 44) Thus, disabled people face prejudice, social barriers, low expectations, distorted sense of self, isolation, and marginalization experienced by all persons considered of less-than-equal worth. Struggling with Internalized Ableism I have to admit that the first time I heard the term ableism, I winced and rolled my eyes. It’s not that I’m against the use of -isms to describe bigotry. There’s enough bigotry in the world to justify a whole dictionary full of -isms. My problem was more basic: I was very naïve. I didn’t think that ableism existed. After all, who actually believes that able-bodied people are of greater worth than disabled people? Little did I know then that in the service of my own sanity, functioning, and independence, I would need to root out my own deeply entrenched ableism. Until I had to deal with the fact of being disabled, it had never occurred to me that I carried any kind of prejudice or distortion regarding disabled people at all. In fact, I have a very vivid memory, from my early adulthood, about an interaction with a disabled person in which I acted with respect and care. One summer day, I was walking down Shattuck Avenue in Berkeley, when a young man in a wheelchair called me over and asked me to drain his urine bag into the street. I was happy to do it, and he seemed to have no self-consciousness about it at all. Perhaps he sensed my innocence and knew that I would be kind. I don’t know. All I know is that it’s one of my best memories. But why would I remember that moment? It made me feel good about myself. It made me feel helpful. It made me feel compassionate. Are any of those feelings a problem? It depends on what lies beneath them. For me, they were based on a subtext of “Oh, this poor man has to actually ask a stranger to empty his urine bag—on a public street.” The fact that he was gracious, self-respecting, and without shame does not take away from the fact that I thought of him with pity—and I that I felt lucky that I wasn’t him. If you asked me what I felt when I saw a person in a wheelchair, I’d inevitably say, “Oh, that must be so hard for him.” Or if you asked me about a person who was deaf, I’d probably say, “Oh, it must be awful not to be able to hear Beethoven.” It didn’t matter what the situation. I felt sorry for people who weren’t able-bodied in the way that our society defines it. Of course, I never thought I was being bigoted, because one of my best friends was in a wheelchair, and if one of your best friends is…well, you know. What does it mean to feel sorry for disabled people? What does it mean that I was glad not to be one of them? What does it mean that my first thought wasn’t about the person but about how hard, how limited, how sad, how embarrassing, how terrible that person’s life must be? Is that really bigotry? I think it is. My reactions were based on a stereotype of what a disabled person must be feeling, of what a disabled person must be thinking, and of what a disabled person’s life must be like. What’s missing from all of these moments is something as necessary to human existence as clean air and water. It’s called respect. Respect and pity do not go hand in hand. Respect and feeling sorry for someone do not go hand in hand. Respect and thanking God you’re not like that poor guy over there do not go hand in hand. Respect only goes hand in hand with full acceptance, with encouragement, with love for the individual, and with justice. Respect powers life forward. It doesn’t leave it hanging in mid-air while you wring your hands and think, “Oh, I’m so glad I’m not you.” When I checked out my attitude toward myself, I nearly choked on what a toxin ableism is. I say this because, when I finally gave in and began using the word “disabled” to describe myself, I felt as though I were giving in to some sort of adversary. Why? Because in some of the deepest places in my being, those places in which the light of rationality and the balm of compassion had not yet entered, I felt ashamed. I was now one of them: those people over there, the ones who are always too loud, or walk oddly, or talk oddly, or look oddly. They’re the people I felt sorry for all those years when I thought I was being compassionate, and accepting, and helpful. Now I am one of them. Now I have to cross the line and say, “Yes, I’ve faked it very well all my life, and now the facade is gone and I am who I’ve always been.” When the culture tells you that being disabled means that your life isn’t worth as much as the next person’s life, that message tends to engender self-hatred. And, for me, that self-hatred resulted in isolation, depression, lack of confidence, low energy, and reduced functioning. Over the past two years, I’ve moved away from feeling ashamed. I’ve done so by looking at the internalized, cultural messages that once compromised my confidence, overwhelmed me, made me lose sight of my capabilities, and impeded my ability to feel worthy of love and respect. I’ve realized that my shame, my guilt, my depression, my sense of isolation, and my loss of abilities were in part the result of culturally imposed attitudes. With this realization came a resurgence of confidence, a return of independence and power, and a gut-level understanding of my right to be an equal member of the world in which I live. This change began when I came across the social model of disability. Embracing the Social Model of Disability In an article I wrote for The Commons in June of 2010, I spoke about the distance I felt from the non-autistic world, saying, “[I]f you are a typically abled person, we live worlds apart.” The feeling was an honest one and, yet, I was troubled by those words from the time I first saw them in print. I thought long and hard about why, and I finally came up with an answer. I came to realize that while I sometimes experience myself as living worlds apart from non-autistic people, this feeling is not a function of my autism. I am not actually worlds apart from anyone because I am autistic. I sometimes feel worlds apart because the world in which I live is not yet inclusive enough to take my particular set of strengths and sensitivities into account. In the larger world, two models of disability are always in play. The first is the medical model, which posits that something is wrong with me, something from which I suffer, something that must be treated and, perhaps, someday cured by medical intervention. In this model, my autism is a disorder, and I am somewhere “over there,” apart from regular folks, separate and unequal. I have sometimes found myself trapped by this point of view, mainly because I have imbibed about a half-century of negative ideas about autism and the general condition of being disabled. I had accepted without question the idea that all autistic people would rather be non-autistic and, by extension, that all physically atypical people would rather be typical. After reading the eloquent and searing words of many disabled people, I have come to understand that this point of view is a terrible distortion. Many, many of us are proud to be who we are and would not want to be different. The Deaf community is a perfect example of a group that embraces its experience of the world as perfectly valid and celebrates its own unique culture. The autistic community is beginning to do the same. Of course, there are disabilities that require medical intervention for health and quality of life. However, not all disabilities fit this model and, even when they do, they cannot be entirely defined by it. Personally, I have moved away from the medical model, mainly because it tends to create a hierarchy in which some people’s lives have value and other people’s lives do not. It creates a mindset in which we celebrate the lives of some, while mourning the lives of others, simply based upon physical difference. I do not accept this way of understanding the richness and complexity of human life. An alternative lens through which to view disability is the social model. According to this model, disability is a social construct. That is, one can be disabled only in relation to an accepted norm. So, all the things I value about myself—my acute sensory sensitivities, my deep ability to empathize, my visual acuity, my ability to enjoy silence and a slow conversational pace—become disabilities simply because I live in a culture that does not value them. For example, because I have hyper-acute hearing, I have to wear earplugs when I go downtown or into any sound-filled environment. Until recently, I’ve thought of my hyper-acute hearing as a problem, because I find it very hard to converse with other people in public or to concentrate in the midst of noise. But my hearing isn’t a problem in isolation. It’s only a problem because I live in a very loud culture—full of noise, full of words, full of TVs and radios and music playing everywhere I go. If I lived in a quieter culture, my hyper-acute hearing would not be a problem. In fact, when it comes to keeping people safe from harm, it would be an asset. In the same way, if I lived in a culture that valued deliberation and a more measured verbal pace, I wouldn’t have the problem of struggling to keep up with rapid-fire small talk. In a society in which impulsive action and rapid speech trump other ways of experiencing life, I do not fit. In the face of this mismatch, the only way for me to stay connected to others is to consistently ask for other people to adjust the environment so that I can be present. For example, at one of the stores in my town, I ask a staff person to turn off the music when I come to shop, and whomever I ask is always happy to oblige. Everyone who works at the store wants the place to be accessible to me, and they know that I cannot operate in an environment with music coming from every speaker. Because the staff is willing to be flexible, I have full access, just like everyone else. In stores in which the staff will not turn down the music, the environment is so aversive that I cannot enter, and full inclusion becomes impossible. Moreover, when I go to my doctor’s office for long appointments, I use a text-to-text device in order to communicate. Doing so allows me to avoid coming home in a state of auditory overload. My husband and I had to work long and hard to find a doctor open to this form of communication. Because it was a painful, discouraging, and exhausting process, I feel especially fortunate to have happened upon a sensitive doctor. At one of my first appointments, in fact, the power of the social model of disability became clear. After we had been typing back and forth on the Ubi-Duo for about a half hour, she said, “I’m exhausted. I’m not used to typing so much. Now I know how you feel with your auditory processing challenges.” And I replied, “That’s amazing. Writing and typing are so natural to me that I forget that other people could find them difficult.” It was a perfect moment. She understood me. I understood her. The gulf had been bridged. I had a different way of communicating during appointments, that was all. My way of communicating was no better and no worse than anyone else’s. At that moment, I became more than the sum of another person’s preconceptions. I felt myself a part of the world, able to express myself fully, with a presence equal to that of every other human being. So, yes, I sometimes feel that I live worlds apart from others, but much less so now, because I realize that it doesn’t have to be that way. If we lived in a society that took human diversity for granted, that made room for difference as a deeply held value, every one of us would benefit. Our view of one another would become much more expansive, much more respectful, and much more compassionate. Ultimately, we might even see one other as perfectly different and perfectly human. The Misleading Nature of the Deficit Model The deficit model of Asperger’s and autism, as expressed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), does not focus on diversity, difference, and the social model. It focuses on impairment and disorder, which leads some professionals to dismiss our gifts as “splinter skills.” The emphasis on deficits does not help autistic people to feel whole and accepted. In fact, it can be quite dispiriting. One way for me to overcome the impact of the deficit model has been to turn it on its head. After all, the deficit model isn’t simply prejudicial, but entirely misleading. The language of deficit hides the intrinsic nature of autism. In my own experience, autism is not a condition of deficit but of overabundance. I’ve never viewed my difficulties as deficits, because I spend a great deal of my daily energy dealing with an experience that is laden with perception and feeling. I hear everything very clearly, with very little filtering. My eyes are constantly taking in the visual world: color, texture, pattern, and motion. I have a vivid emotional and visual memory, both for events that have just occurred and for experiences long past. I feel other people’s emotions immediately upon meeting them, and it’s in my nature to see things from multiple points of view. When I look at autistic people who have been deemed “low-functioning,” I see people whose sensitivities make me look absolutely wooden. Our presentation is very, very different and, obviously, I can do a great many conventional things that others cannot. But intuitively, I know that they are not dealing with perceptual deficits. I see people whose overabundance of feeling and perception is both fundamentally different from mine and altogether overwhelming to their ability to function in any kind of normative way. It’s this relative lack of normative functioning that brings in the deficit model. And, in terms of helping people to qualify for services and obtain needed assistance, it’s not a bad model. After all, if you need a service, you need to be able to document why. The problem is that once the deficit model is in place, it becomes impossible for most people to move beyond it. If you start talking about your internal experience, you get dismissed because what becomes important is how you appear and what you do, not who you are or what you feel. And how you appear is generally what shows up on an assessment, because the questions are geared to the surface level and not much else. So, for example, if I were to say that I hold tenaciously to my own feelings and ideas, it might appear that I have difficulty seeing multiple points of view. But part of the reason I am so tenacious is that I’ve gone through a process of looking at things from so many different points of view that I would drown in the sea of other people’s perceptions if I didn’t make a judgment as to where I stand and what I believe. In arriving at a conclusion, I file through an immense number of possibilities and, once I’ve gone through the process, I generally form a strong opinion. It doesn’t mean that my mind is closed. It means that I’m not going to be convinced out of an idea or a feeling simply for the sake of social form or expectation. Apparently, because I hold firmly to my conclusions, I can appear to be unempathetic to those who do not think as I do. If people only knew how intuitively I bounce from one person’s perception to another, how intensely I feel other people’s feelings, and how much mental and emotional discipline it takes to parse experiences that aren’t even on most people’s radar, they would see that my way of thinking is anything but inflexible—or easy. Fortunately for me, I can speak, write, and express my internal life to other people. People listen because I speak in a language they can understand. Where would I be if I didn’t have words? Where would I be if I weren’t able to navigate the world in a language it understands? Then I’d just look like a walking deficit model. And people without the empathy to see what’s going on below the surface would call me unempathetic, incapable of seeing things from other points of view, and without feeling. And they would be very, very wrong. In describing autism as an experience of abundance, I don’t want to minimize the difficulties of living a life of intense perception, especially for those who cannot function in conventional ways. What I want to do is to signal that far from lacking the basic essentials of humanity, we feel our humanity acutely—and we suffer when others choose not to honor it. On Puzzles, Privilege, and Missing Pronouns Part of deconstructing cultural concepts of disability has involved taking a good, long look at the language that the world uses to describe disabled people and its implications for the ways in which we think about ourselves. In the autism community, I often happen across the puzzle metaphor. It finds its way into statements such as “My autistic daughter is such a puzzle” or “We’re still putting together the pieces of the puzzle that is my son.” I’ve always had a visceral response to the puzzle image to describe autism and autistic people, especially when used in the puzzle-piece logo of Autism Speaks. It has always felt so offensive on a gut level that it has taken me a long time to write about it. A puzzle suggests the idea that there might be some pieces missing. The resulting impact upon one’s sense of self, and upon the perceived possibilities for one’s life, can be devastating. Of course, the idea that anyone has pieces missing is anathema to me. The only way in which you could look at a person and see pieces missing is if you begin with a preconceived notion of what a person is supposed to look like. If the person doesn’t fit that preconceived picture in your mind, then you see all kinds of gaps. But if you see the person for himself or herself, and accept the person as a given, without reference to an outside standard, then the picture becomes whole. The person is simply a person, on his or her own terms—nothing more and nothing less. If you begin with an idea of “normal” that says that a person should be able to speak by the age of two like “normal” children, enjoy the same kinds of activities as “normal” adults, and socialize in a “normal” fashion, you’ve got a complex, preconceived image of what it means to be a whole person. It’s nearly impossible that any atypical person could even begin to approach that image of normal. When we don’t, some of us are told that we’ve got pieces missing. So who gets to decide what picture is normal? The answer is simple: other people who have the privilege of defining themselves as normal. It’s a nearly invisible privilege for the most part, because it’s everywhere. It took me a long time to see it and, ironically enough, I began to see it by virtue of what is missing from the language of many of the non-autistic people who talk about us. Two words are missing from the statement “My autistic daughter is such a puzzle”—two little words that would change that sentence from an expression of privilege to an expression of a personal experience. And those two little words are to me. If someone were to write, “My daughter is such a puzzle to me,” then we’d be getting somewhere. All it takes is the inclusion of the personal pronoun. Of course, there is still that little issue of the puzzle metaphor, which runs the risk of portraying the child as a series of pieces, but at least the source of the fragmented perception would stay where it belongs: in the eye of the beholder. The speaker would be taking responsibility for describing his or her own limited perception rather than an objective fact. Another example of this limited perception appeared in the statement of a parent who said that her autistic child is afraid of things “that just aren’t scary.” She didn’t say, “that just aren’t scary to me.” She said, “that just aren’t scary,” as though there were an objective measure of what is frightening. These words imply that, somewhere in the far reaches of the universe, there is some ideal called scary, that we all know what it is, and that if we’re scared of things that don’t measure up to that ideal of scary, something is terribly wrong. Now, I have always assumed that being frightened was a subjective experience and that an image or a situation that frightened one person might not frighten another. I have never assumed that what went on in my own mind was exactly the same as what went on in other people’s minds. Far from it. Being able to understand that other people think differently than I do is called having Theory of Mind (ToM). So, because I am well aware of the subjectivity of all perception, I have excellent ToM, even though as an autistic person, the common wisdom is that I do not. And when a non-autistic person can’t imagine why an autistic person might be afraid of something, that non-autistic person seems to lack ToM, even though the common wisdom is that non-autistic people are well versed in empathizing with the mental states of other people. Common wisdom notwithstanding, I see evidence that non-autistic people lack ToM regarding autistic people all the time. In fact, I see it in the work of “experts” on autism, and yet rarely does anyone call them on it. Usually, the ones who do the calling out are autistic people like me who, by definition, don’t understand ToM, so we’re dismissed before we begin. And once we’re dismissed, people can own the discourse about us and say just about anything they want. Consider the following. A non-autistic person says that the world of an autistic person is a puzzle. That statement is taken as objective truth by most non-autistic people. In fact, it is irrefutable evidence that the person speaking is “normal” and that the person being spoken of has a “disorder.” All too often, family, friends, teachers, and professionals look at the autistic person, shake their heads, and say, “Yes, you’re right. Poor thing. He certainly is a puzzle!” An autistic person says that the world of neurotypical people is a puzzle. That statement is taken as a purely subjective perception by most non-autistic people. In fact, it is irrefutable evidence that the person speaking has a “disorder” and that the people being spoken of are “normal.” All too often, family, friends, teachers, and professionals look at the autistic person, shake their heads, and say, “Poor thing. He’s so impaired. He just doesn’t understand us.” Could the arbitrary nature of privilege be any clearer when one set of people has “understanding” when they don’t understand, and the other set of people is “impaired” when they don’t understand? Maybe it’s that I’m autistic, or a born democrat, or hopelessly addicted to fairness, but I find this kind of imbalance deeply disturbing and painfully unjust. Seeing it for what it is, however, has helped me to lessen the impact of this discourse on my sense of myself. As a result, I’ve come to value in myself much of what the larger culture dismisses as having little value. Autism, Disability, and the Obligation to Get Well In the spring of 2011, I began reading Robert Murphy’s The Body Silent, one of the great books on the social and cultural context of disability. Murphy, a professor of anthropology at Columbia, became a quadriplegic in his 50s as the result of a benign tumor on his spinal cord. He wrote The Body Silent from the perspective of an anthropologist observing himself as a disabled person in the context of late 20th-century America. His writing immediately spoke to me, in part because I’ve lived my life from the perspective of an anthropologist in a foreign culture, and in part because I recognize so many of my own experiences in his words. His book sent my thinking in all kinds of new directions and gave me new tools for rooting out ableism from my own psyche. Among the many passages that I’ve found powerful is the following, which describes the social role of a person who becomes ill: A person’s ordinary social roles—mother, father, lawyer, baker, student, and so forth—all become temporarily suspended when he or she falls ill. The individual becomes a “sick person,” which relieves him or her of some or all of the ordinary obligations, depending on the severity of the illness. The suspension of his other duties does not mean that the person playing the sick role has none at all. Quite the contrary; he is saddled with one big obligation: He must make every effort to get well again. In our own doctor-ridden culture, this means that he must seek medical advice; he must take his medicine and follow the doctor’s orders. This expectation mandates the proper role of the sick as one of passivity. The sick person is excused from work or school, household duties are suspended or at least limited, and connubial relations may be put on ice. But in return, he must devote full time to getting better. (Murphy, 19) The temporary suspension of numerous social roles in favor of a single imperative to “get well” is a trap that is well known to many of us. Sometimes, this suspension of other obligations is necessary and welcome. For instance, when I had surgery to remove a degenerative disk in my neck several years ago, I spent several weeks recovering my strength before I was able to get back to “normal.” And I well remember the feeling that my only role was to heal. At the time, I felt great comfort in knowing that others would take care of business while I recovered. But the situation becomes much more complicated and troubling when a person has not a short-term illness but a life-long condition. In 2009, I went through a particularly low period with being autistic. During my 50 years of ignorance about my condition, I had pushed myself unmercifully— physically, psychologically, and emotionally—to the point of burnout. At the same time, the benzodiazepines were wreaking complete havoc with my sensory and emotional life. For a while, I needed assistance with basic tasks, such as food shopping, housecleaning, and cooking. It was painfully difficult to ask for this help, and my self-esteem suffered significantly. Two years later, I have adapted to my disability, I have gotten off the benzodiazepines, and I have healed from the burnout. As a result, I no longer need such assistance and I have fully regained my independence. But the legacy of having once required assistance has cast a pall over my life that I have never completely dispelled. Until now, I’d never known why. I’m beginning to understand, though. I had unwittingly taken on the passive role of “sick person,” despite the fact that I did not consider myself sick and despite the fact I have always been a fiercely independent person. How did this happen? And why did it cast such a pall over my life? With conditions such as autism or other long-term disabilities, there is no “getting well” in the conventional sense. There can be therapies, accommodations, and the amelioration of certain symptoms, but there is no pill, no surgery, and no treatment that will remove the condition and render the person “normal.” Thus, according to the medical model of disability so widely accepted in our culture, being autistic automatically puts one into the category of “sick” person (think “autism epidemic”), with a concomitant obligation to “get well.” But if you have a condition from which you can not “get well” according to the standards of the larger culture, you are completely unable to fulfill the one social imperative that the world gives you. And if you fail at that one obligation, then the quality of all the other social roles that you might have—father, mother, husband, wife, friend—immediately becomes suspect. Thus, you end up with the widely held belief that the partners of disabled people are heroic for sticking around—and that they do so only out of pity, as though disabled people are not full and equal participants in the process of their own lives. And you get a great deal of talk about the numerous (and very real) challenges that the parents of disabled children face, to the exclusion of talk about the numerous (and very real) delights that such parents find in their disabled children. You get T-shirts, mugs, and tote bags that say, “I love someone with autism.” You don’t get T-shirts, mugs, and tote bags that say, “Someone with autism loves me.” Of course, defining us as “sick” generates a great deal of money, energy, and emotion in the race for a “cure.” After all, if our one imperative is to “get well,” the culture is going to make sure that we do it. And, inevitably, the only way to get other people to join the search for a cure is to generate FUDD (fear, uncertainty, doubt, and dread) about living with a disability. In the autism world, Autism Speaks is masterful at this form of gamesmanship, which has the net effect of making the parents of autistic children absolutely terrified of what might happen to their children without all the latest treatments, without 40-60 hours per week of expensive therapy, and without that elusive “cure.” The fact that there are millions of disabled adults, like me, who have created happy and fulfilling lives, without full-time treatment and without a cure, seems to matter not at all. We are ignored—and why? We have broken the obligation of being a “sick” person. We have not remained passive. We have not lived our lives in a quest to “get well.” We have lived our lives in a quest to live well as the people we are. As a result, we find ourselves in the vortex of a great deal of distortion for wanting to simply be at peace with ourselves and carve out a meaningful life. It’s as though, having given up our “patient” status, we’ve committed some sort of cardinal sin. Thus, you get autistic self-advocates, who do not want to be cured, being told that we’re “fake autistics.” If we reject the role of the “sick” person, with the one overriding obligation to get better, it’s as though we short-circuit the cultural wiring. The response is often along the lines of “If you refuse to see your autistic mind and body as sick, and you refuse to accept the social role that having such a mind and body entails, then you must not be autistic at all.” That logic, of course, is not logic at all, which is an indication of how deeply threatening stepping out of our assigned role feels to other people. And the illogic means that we face psychological warfare of the worst kind: we find ourselves verbally stripped of the very condition that is the source of our struggles, our triumphs, our sensitivity, our discipline, and our awareness. In those moments, it’s as though our entire life histories have been erased. Were we not threatening a deeply held cultural value, the response to us might be somewhat more productive, along the lines of “I give you a lot of credit for your strength and your accomplishments, and I celebrate that you have a happy and fulfilling life. But please be aware that my adult autistic son, who tries to self-injure all day long, who bloodies himself on a daily basis, who gives himself concussions when he’s stressed, is in a state of irremediable pain that no accommodation can fix. Do you understand why I want to move heaven and earth to find a cure? And, until that help arrives, can you give me some insight as to how I might understand what is happening to him?” That would be a conversation worth having. Unfortunately, I’ve never seen it actually happen. In the absence of that conversation, I understand the wholesale rejection of words like “disease,” “disorder,” and “sickness” in the autistic community. I’ve gone to great lengths to distance myself from words like those, and I’ve always felt a great deal of discomfort about it, too. After all, what is so shameful about having a disease, or a disorder, or a sickness? Isn’t rejecting those words just playing into the hands of those who see disability as the worst possible thing that could happen? Don’t we need to reclaim those words and empty them of all of their dehumanizing connotations? I think we do. But it’s difficult to do so when being labeled diseased or disordered puts you into the trap of having only one social role, and it’s a role you can’t fulfill. I can testify that being given a role in which you are expected to be passive, and that you cannot fulfill, is a deeply depressing, limiting, and enervating experience. Given all the givens, it’s entirely understandable that the response would be to reject the label altogether. As I sit here thinking about all of these issues, I’m reminded of someone I never met, but about whom I know a great deal: my husband’s late wife, Karolka, who died of ALS 10 years ago at the age of 55. One of the most memorable things that Bob has ever told me about her has to do with the whole issue of disease and cure. Even before the diagnosis of ALS was confirmed, Bob and Karolka sought out all kinds medical interventions to try and heal her—or to slow down the progression of the condition. And on a regular basis, they would hear from a friend or community member with another great idea for them to try. At a certain point, Karolka decided that it was time to stop chasing a cure and to start accepting and living her life. Even after she’d made that decision, people would periodically show up with new ideas, but she had moved on. And when she did, she found a great deal of joy. She never referred to ALS as “my disease.” She always referred to it as “my condition.” And lest you think that she was engaging in feel-good, New Age, mamby-pamby, politically correct nonsense, please allow me to disabuse you of that notion. She had absolutely no time for that kind of distraction, and the last thing on her mind was a desire to fulfill someone else’s idea of how to talk about her life. But in speaking about ALS as a condition rather than as a disease, she gave herself a great gift: she made herself an active participant in her process of living and dying, rather than a passive victim of an enemy beyond her control. And she released herself from the obligation of having to “get well” when getting well was out of the question. I’m not saying that every disabled person has to see himself or herself the same way. And I’m certainly not saying that it’s necessarily wrong to want a cure for one’s condition. What I’m arguing is that there are a great many troubling consequences to having a cure in a culture in which our main social obligation would be to avail ourselves of it. What I’m arguing against is the whole idea of the obligation altogether. Far too many people will never have typical neurologies, typical bodies, typical minds, or typical ways of being. Giving disabled people an obligation we can’t fulfill means that we become people of less than equal worth. And it also means that we have very little support to fulfill a number of other roles—such as mother, father, husband, wife, son, daughter, friend, neighbor, and community member—that we want and need, just as everyone else does. The overriding quest for a cure means that an organization like Autism Speaks spends most of its budget on research and only 4% on services for autistic people living in the here and now. What is this “autism advocacy” organization advocating for, anyway? It is advocating for us to assume one role, and one role only—that of a patient, passively waiting to get better. It is not advocating for us to fulfill our birthright—to participate fully in all that the world offers to typically able-bodied people. I have reclaimed that birthright. Disorder in Society, Disorder in Self Some years ago, I took a two-year training course in Jewish shamanic healing. I came away understanding a great deal about the many ways in which ancient Jewish culture was similar to many other indigenous cultures, especially regarding the role of the healer and the importance of ritual in maintaining the health of the individual and the society. Ever since that training, mainly as a way to understand our own culture’s attitudes toward sickness and health, I’ve become very interested in how various indigenous cultures view illness and healing. So when I ran across the following in The Body Silent, I began to think about the ways in which it illuminates the autism discourse: Among the Mundurucu, and many other South American Indian societies, the most serious threats to health are believed to arise from violations of the social order, specifically from the activities of malevolent and alienated individuals, people who, say the Mundurucu, “are angry at everybody.” Most diseases, the Mundurucu believe, are caused by evil shamans who manufacture supernaturally charged objects, called caushi, that enter a person’s body and cause illness…. Just like the invisible malignant objects he manufactures, the Mundurucu sorcerer is thought to operate covertly, maintaining his everyday demeanor and mask of sociability while spreading disease and suffering. Killing the accused restores the body politic, and at the same time purges the populace’s fears, envies, and secret hostilities, which have been projected onto his person. The good shaman brings back life and normal function to the body and community; the evil shaman creates death and disorder—which are really the same thing. (Murphy, 30-32) One of the images that struck me right away was that of an outside force entering the body and rendering the individual ill. In the mainstream discourse, autism is sometimes imagined to be the result of a foreign substance being introduced into the body by way of vaccines, environmental toxins, or food additives. At other times, autism becomes the outside invader itself, taking its victim hostage. In both cases, the seemingly inevitable corollary is that autism is a condition separate from the person. If the autism were removed, the narrative goes, the formerly autistic person would be well, normal, and whole. Thus, despite the vast diversity of the autism spectrum, despite the dozens of possible genetic markers for autism, and despite the fact that autism is a complex neurological condition, most people speak of autism as though it were a single entity that could be safely excised. But where our own culture diverges from the indigenous view is the degree to which the “cure” is focused wholly on changing the person, rather than the social context in which the person lives and breathes. In cure circles, there is very little talk about changing the disorder in society in order to heal the individual. The only exception comes in the form of the vaccines-cause-autism contingent, whose members believe that keeping people from introducing vaccines into their children will stop the “autism epidemic.” Just as the Mundurucu view the sorcerer as a malevolent entity who operates “covertly, maintaining his everyday demeanor and mask of sociability while spreading disease and suffering,” many who believe that vaccines cause autism view the pharmaceutical companies, the vaccine manufacturers, and the federal government as co-conspirators in a plot to render the American public ill, all the while going about their business looking as respectable as can be. Of course, the anti-vaccine contingent does not help anyone become better. In fact, they only introduce more illness into communities by lowering herd immunity through their anti-vaccination efforts. In trying to heal disorder, they only create more of it. As for the rest? Those who believe that autism is caused by environmental agents, rather than by genetics, show little to no interest in stopping the alleged cause of the autism. If you believe that pesticides cause autism, shouldn’t you be working against the use of pesticides? If you believe that food additives cause autism, shouldn’t you be working against the use of food additives? And some people are. But far more people devote all of their attention to altering or curing the autistic person, despite the fact the autistic person, in this scenario, is simply the canary in the coal mine. It’s as though, instead of working on better conditions to keep miners from dying of the methane poisoning that kills the canary, everyone involved decided to re-engineer the human body to tolerate high levels of methane. In that kind of scenario, the human body becomes the source of the disorder, and no one need alter the larger environment. I read a comment recently on a blog that spoke very directly to this idea. In writing of the necessity for a cure for autism, the commenter said: The world isn’t going to get any less bright, less loud, less crowded, or less dependent on the need to communicate in our children’s lifetimes no matter how much we may wish it; and no matter how wrong it is, funding for a generation of children needing lifetime assistance will not be forthcoming. (Leitch) I found this comment quite interesting, because it clarifies so succinctly the impact of social disorder on autistic people while eschewing the necessity for healing the disorder in the body politic. The society we live in is not only very bright, very loud, very crowded, and very biased toward verbal communication, it is also a society in which humane, compassionate, lifetime care for severely autistic people is nonexistent. The commenter’s solution is to find a cure. He has wholly given up on the idea of changing the world around him, and he puts the necessity for change squarely on the autistic individual. I think it’s apparent to most of us who have reached mid-life that the world has become quite a bit more disordered than it was when we were children. I remember my father limiting our TV watching; these days, you can hardly go into a restaurant or a waiting room without a television on. I remember a world of books and LPs; these days, there are iPods, computers, and all manner of technology that keeps us constantly bombarded by visual and auditory stimulation. I remember when you weren’t supposed to play your music too loudly, so as not to inconvenience other people; these days, I hear music blaring out of people’s homes and cars on a regular basis. I remember when you could actually read the credits after a movie because they went by slowly enough for the average human to parse; these days, the text on the screen flies by so quickly that you have to click the pause button just to read it. I remember when classrooms were orderly and quiet; these days, in far too many places, they are loud and chaotic. All of these factors mean that those of us who flew under the radar 50 years ago could certainly never do so now. It’s not our autism that has changed. It’s the environment. And yet, very few people talk about the environment in any thorough-going way. Yes, there are special ed classrooms, and some autism-friendly movie events, but there is a huge difference between providing separate venues for autistic people and addressing the disorder in the larger society that renders us disabled. Clearly, not all the disabling features of autism can be solved by reordering the environment. As one autism parent said to me, no accommodations can keep the world from being one in which bees buzz, babies cry, and dogs run—all of which are very painful to her autistic son. But there is much in the environment that can be changed so as to render the world less aversive and disabling to autistic people. Few people want to talk about that kind of change because, frankly, most people have the privilege of accepting society just as it is—and those who see the enormity of the problem feel powerless to change it. So, instead of the social order changing, it’s individuals who must change. From what I have experienced, putting this burden on the individual is a core feature of the mental health profession, which largely sees difficulties like depression and anxiety as personal problems rather than social ones. Very few therapists are willing to engage the question of the ways in which skyrocketing levels of depression and anxiety have to do with the cold, lonely, stressful, alienating nature of American society. Instead, the solution is almost always to talk it out and take a pill. After many years in recovery as an abuse survivor, and now as a late-diagnosed autistic, I’ve come to realize that American culture thrives on this individual illness paradigm. Everything is a disorder in the individual. If you’re depressed because you’re disabled and feeling isolated, you have a mood disorder. I actually had my last therapist tell me so. I said to him something along the lines of “Wait a minute. I’m dealing with a disability in mid-life, in a world that is set up to exclude me more often than not. How does that translate to a mood disorder? Aren’t I having a perfectly normal response to the gravity of the situation?” He just kept telling me that it was my problem. In the final analysis, it’s the person diagnosed as “disordered” who ends up in the position of the Mundurucu sorcerer and becomes seen as the source of social disorder. Disabled children are considered a “drain” on the school system. Disabled adults are considered “a burden” on society. Autistic people are called unempathetic, rigid, black-and-white thinkers in a society in which most political discourse is inhuman, inflexible, and polarized. People with mental illness are objects of fear and derision. The list goes on and on, the prevailing mythology being that if all these people could simply be cured—or just plain disappear—normality would reign, fear would be banished, and all would be well in the body politic. In the popular imagination, we disabled people end up not in the position of the victim of an evil sorcerer, but in the position of the evil sorcerer himself. In the minds of so many, to cure a disabled person—or to render the disabled person invisible—“restores the body politic, and at the same time purges the populace’s fears, envies, and secret hostilities, which have been projected onto his person.” The larger society becomes the good shaman, “who brings back life and normal function to the body and community.” The individuals labeled “ill” become the evil shaman, who “creates death and disorder.” And yet, unsurprisingly, no one is healed. We simply end up creating a society of alienated individuals who, as the Mundurucu say, “are angry at everybody.” No wonder disabled people live with such a high degree of stress, social exclusion, and struggle. Neurodiversity, Grief, and the Normal Minority The neurodiversity movement, a subset of the larger disability rights movement, posits that all people have the right to be front-and-center in conversations that affect them, that personhood should not be defined by an arbitrary standard of normal, and that there are many ways of being, learning, thinking, and perceiving. I fully support these positions. However, I no longer identify myself with the neurodiversity movement, in part because I saw how easily I was beginning to slip into polarizing perspectives and attitudes that I now consider untenable—such as a thorough-going impatience for those who grieve an autism diagnosis. What’s often lacking, from a neurodiversity perspective, in conversations about autism is the acknowledgment that both autistic people and the parents of autistic children go through a grief process. I consider it essential that this process be recognized and respected, because it highlights so many of the limiting assumptions on which our society rests. If we can discuss these assumptions, openly and with mutual kindness, autistic people and autism parents will emerge with self-respect, with dignity, and with renewed power. From what I’ve observed, the grief comes from three different sources. The Loss of the Idealized Normal Self or Idealized Normal Child After I received my Asperger’s diagnosis in November of 2008, I went through a prolonged period of grief regarding the loss of my idealized self —the passing of who I thought I was and who I thought I could become. The grief was profound, and it took me a long time to carry it well and to dispel it. In my conversations with the parents of autistic children, I have found that there is a similar grief for the loss of the expected normal child and for all the dreams that attended that child. The fact that we often hold so tightly to the vision of the idealized self and idealized child derives directly from the fact that, in American society, being normal is the most important value. The socially constructed idea of normal exercises a tremendous hold on the imagination. Aspiring to be normal is more important than aspiring to be a great teacher, or a brilliant researcher, or a bringer of peace to a war-torn country. In fact, it is considered to be the prerequisite to doing just about anything else. And that is because anyone who is even minimally aware knows what normal looks like, understands that he or she is supposed to aspire to it and, at one time or another, believes that normal and natural are exactly the same thing. Of course, they aren’t. Normal is a social construct, first and foremost. In every society, it’s a different creature. In 21st-century America, normal looks something like this: Walking is normal. Speaking is normal. Seeing is normal. Hearing is normal. Having white skin is normal. Being a Christian is normal. Being heterosexual is normal. Socializing in large groups is normal Having an Anglo-Saxon surname is normal. Speaking English is normal. Having European ancestors is normal. Being middle class is normal. Being educated is normal. Having children is normal. Being happy is normal. Believing in God is normal. Of course, this list is far from exhaustive; after all, being normal is a very complex business. But if you look carefully at even this very partial list, what becomes clear is that being normal is not normative. Anyone with a characteristic not on that list falls outside the bounds of normal, to a greater or lesser degree. Having several characteristics not on that list pushes one further toward the margins. If you put together all of us who do not fulfill all the criteria, you get the majority of people on this planet. But the illusion by which we live is that most people are normal. This illusion is a prime example of Murphy’s assertion that begins this chapter: “The mental constructs by which we make sense of society are only loosely related (sometimes inversely) to what is really going on.” When it comes to the myth of normal, those words are especially apt. And part of what’s “really going on” is that parents of autistic children find themselves dragged, often kicking and screaming, out of the land of normal—a terrain that they had formerly taken entirely for granted. This phenomenon leads to the second source of grief. Leaving Behind One’s Own Normality Having an autistic child means that an able-bodied parent can no longer lay claim to being normal. You know those angels with the flaming swords, guarding the path to the Tree of Knowledge in the Garden of Eden? They’re the same ones standing between able-bodied autism parents and their formerly normal selves. You hang out with marginalized people and, sooner or later, you get marginalized. Anyone who has ever been in a public school knows this to be the case. Parents, remember the kids you didn’t want to hang out with, the ones you avoided like the plague, the ones you secretly (or not so secretly) made fun of, the ones by whom you didn’t want to be tainted by association? Now your child is one of them—which makes you one of them. This inconvenient truth is what causes people to take extreme positions about how it must be the vaccines that cause autism, or the environmental toxins, or anything other than genetics, because if autism is genetic, that must mean that they’re one of us. Sometimes, I wonder whether many parents exclude autistic people from the conversation about autism in an attempt to maintain the illusion of their own normality. Perhaps, in their heart of hearts, they want to believe that their autistic children will never grow up to be us—as wonderful as we are—so that the parents can somehow disassociate themselves from us and return to the grieved-for land of normal. I’m not sure, but it certainly seems that there is a disdain for autistic adults in the autism community that borders on the irrational. I’m not sure exactly where it all comes from, but I think that a desire to avoid being tainted for life by us is certainly part of it. The fact is that, like it or not, autism parents have entered the condition of most people who live on this earth. Few of us are normal. In fact, the people who fit the criteria of normal are a very distinct minority. But for this minority, all kinds of privileges and services are available—a point that leads me to the third source of grief. Feeling Frightened about the Autistic Child’s Future My feeling is that grief is a natural part of the process of having a disabled child and, contrary to somewhat popular opinion, it’s not always about wanting a different child. It’s often about just being very frightened on behalf of the one you have. An autism parent watches a child getting bullied, sees the pain a child experiences from being made to feel apart, and worries about whether the adult child will find a partner, have even a small circle of supportive friends, and be happy. And these fears are not unfounded. A great deal of the time, the unhappiness that we face is not caused by the autism itself, but by the bigotry and cruelty of other people. As a parent, I see nothing wrong with grieving that one’s child is going to face prejudice and attempts at exclusion for his or her entire life. You’d have to be living in a fantasy world to think that a disabled person is going to avoid all that in society as presently constituted, and the question of the child’s happiness under those circumstances is crucial. What any parent of any child wants is that doors open for the child, not close. And most people understand that being normal means that you have access to the best jobs, the best educational opportunities, and the widest range of social opportunities. Normal people get to apply to college and, if they get in, they assume that they will be able to learn in an environment that suits them. They don’t have to fill out several pages’ worth of information about the accommodations they need and hope that those accommodations are deemed “reasonable” (by nondisabled people), so that they can go to the college they’ve worked so hard to get into. No, normal people already have those accommodations provided for them, without even asking. It’s a wondrous thing. And what happens when you don’t have those accommodations provided as a matter of course? An easy life it isn’t. It’s natural to grieve that. Of course, the main thing is not to get stuck in the grief and feel like a victim. So What Do We Do? Do we focus on making autistic people “indistinguishable from peers,” or do we work to build a world in which all the people who fall outside the realm of “normal” have equal access and equal rights? If we set out to do both of these tasks, how do we apportion our time and attention? I consider it vital that we not make autistic people hold all the responsibility for change. Certainly, there is nothing wrong with trying to help an autistic child communicate effectively and navigate the world, but doing so cannot be a substitute for fighting to change social and cultural attitudes about normality. And the reason is simple: the child will never be normal, and idle dreams about elusive cures are a distraction from the work that needs doing. I passed for normal, to a greater or lesser extent, for most of my life. I still can, in certain contexts. Does that mean that my problems are solved? No. Does it mean that I can walk through the world, assuming that I will be respected and included? No. My difference becomes apparent eventually or, given the wrong circumstances, immediately. Being married, having a child, earning a graduate degree, writing books, and owning a house—none of it changes the fact that the quality of my life is deeply affected by the attitudes I encounter regarding my difference, by the degree to which people accommodate it, and by the ways in which people exclude me on the basis of it. No amount of passing, and no amount of achievement, will ever change that. I have always known that I am different. Others have always known that I am different. At some very blessed and happy times in my life, other people have seen my difference as a very good thing. And at some very low and very unhappy times in my life, other people have found my difference something to be derided, shamed, even beaten out of me. Over the course of my life, I’ve acquired skills and learned to adapt, but at my core, I’ve never really changed. I’ve always been autistic. My context changed—sometimes for the better, sometimes not—and those changes had a tremendous influence on whether I succeeded at work, in relationships, and with friends. They made the difference between being abled and being disabled. The impact upon my self-esteem and self-respect was directly proportional to how much support and respect I received. So, aiming for apparent normality as a way to resolve one’s fears about an autistic child’s life will not fully solve the problem. Yes, helping a child to navigate the world is crucial, but it can’t be the end of the story. The child will always be different. The child will always know that he or she is different—as will others. The child will never blend in completely. Accepting a socially constructed reality called normal, as though it is available to a disabled child, means, to borrow Murphy’s words, being complicit in one of the “human artifices whose purpose is to perpetuate society, not clarify it.” Perpetuating the status quo will not help anyone who is outside the land of normal. Clarifying the status quo and fighting to change it means creating a world in which many millions of people will finally take their place in the full light of human dignity. Chapter 7 On My Solitary Way When he was dying, Zusya began to cry. His disciples asked him: “Master, why do you cry? Are you afraid that when you stand before the Heavenly Tribunal they will ask you, ‘Zusya, why weren’t you like Moses, like Isaiah, like Maimonides?’” “No,” said Zusya, “that is not why I cry, for I am not a prophet like Moses or like Isaiah, nor a great philosopher like Maimonides.” “Then why do you cry? Of what are you afraid?” his disciples asked again. “Because,” said Zusya, “what if they ask me, ‘Why weren’t you Zusya?’….Then how shall I answer them?” — Martin Buber, Tales of the Hasidim One of the enduring patterns of my life is my on-again, off-again relationship with conventionally structured organizations of all kinds: corporate, political, and religious. In the on-again phase, I join up in order to find community and purpose. I’m on fire with the cause. I’m changing the world. I’m going to find belonging at last. Glory! Hallelujah! In the off-again phase, I realize that I’m not suited to conventional organizational life because of my most enduring and valuable quality: I am a fierce human being. When I’m attempting to be part of the structure of an organization, I try to hide my nature, even from myself. I do everything within my power to subjugate it to my quest for belonging. I attempt to negotiate with it. I try to hammer it into compliance. I attempt to bribe it, talk it to death, and rock it to sleep. But when all is said and done, my fierce nature struggles its way out of the smothering cocoon in which I’ve bound it, and then my time in the organization draws to a close. Sometimes, I just take my toys and go; sometimes, there’s drama. But always, there is a particular turning point that signals that I might need to start looking for the door. Something happens and, while others pay it no mind, I feel it intensely. I usually try to wait it out and see whether the situation improves. Sometimes, I actively try to work it out, for shorter or longer periods, depending upon the context. But, ultimately, I find myself at an impasse. The situation won’t change, and my feelings about the situation won’t change. That’s when I decide to go. I would like to be able to report that, when the moment comes, I feel tremendous liberation and relief. But I don’t. Those feelings come later. At the moment of leaving, I feel a deep sadness. And that’s when the blaming-everyone-else phase takes hold: “Why is no one listening? Why does no one care? Why does no one else see it as I do? What’s the matter with these people?” And then, like clockwork, the self-deprecation phase begins: “What’s wrong with me? Why can’t I keep my mouth shut? Why can’t I be like everyone else? Why am I always an outsider?” It’s not a fun place to be, let me tell you. And all of it—all of it—is a mere distraction. When I finally part ways with the people with whom I’ve been struggling, one truth becomes clear: we’re fundamentally different souls destined to do fundamentally different things. There is no changing it. They don’t see what I see and they don’t understand where I’m coming from. And, by the same token, I don’t see what they see and I don’t understand where they’re coming from. Throwing more and more words at the situation in an attempt to close the gap gets me precisely nothing, except upset and exhaustion. We may share the same politics, or religion, or technical interest, or cause, but that commonality masks a huge difference in outlook and approach. Attempting to join hands on the road to a happy destiny only means that someone is going to get dragged, kicking and screaming, to a place they just don’t want to go. The result is not a happy outcome for anyone. When I’m going round and round and round in my mind in the initial stages of such a debacle, I’m not facing up to the core truth about my life: I am on a solitary path. That’s my life lesson. That’s why these forays into joining up with conventionally structured organizations just don’t work. I’ve gone off my path entirely. The necessity of traveling the solitary path has been the core lesson of all my losses. Over the course of my life, the losses have come thick and fast, and now they’re all crying out at once to say, “You must find the strength to travel this road. Stop arguing. You have no other choice.” Now, don’t get me wrong. The solitary path does not wind through an unpeopled landscape, and it is not an escape from engagement with the difficulties of the world. There is still much work to be done and much struggle to be had, but they take place in a context fundamentally different from an external organizational one. And, of course, I have many, many fellow travelers, all traveling their own solitary paths as well. Could you call us a community? Sure. Call us a community in motion, weaving ceaselessly through one another’s lives. We’re the people who speak the truth, without sugarcoating of any kind, even though few people are happy or comfortable with us when we do. We question and confront authority without apology or shame. We chafe against ideological or political conformity. We value individuals over organizations. And we are each our own leaders. As we travel down the road, we greet each other every day and, when our paths run close by one another, we talk about our struggles. We support one another. We listen to one another. We strengthen one another in the midst of the difficulties of the moment, when the loneliness feels unbearable because so few people understand. And somehow, we always find one another. Always. Even when the darkness descends, and we feel we can’t go another step, we find one another. We call out, each in our own voice, and we hear others calling out in return. And we find peace. For me, finding peace has meant finding purpose. Sometimes, I’ve wondered what on earth that purpose could be. The last time I asked that question, though, I started tripping over the answer, again and again, until I couldn’t miss it. The process started this past Thanksgiving. My husband was spending the day with his adult children in Colrain, my daughter was spending the day with her father’s family in Connecticut, and I was spending the day with a friend—who just happened to be another solitary traveler. The plan was to get together at my house, have some food, and watch a show. I wasn’t planning anything grand, but I offered to make us dinner. My friend has a number of sensory sensitivities regarding smell and taste, and she warned me that, whatever I might make, she might very well not be able to to eat it. She said that she’s used to having to bring her own food and that I shouldn’t feel badly if she couldn’t eat mine. She clearly felt worried that I’d be feel insulted or annoyed, so I let her know that it was all fine, and that since I was going to make myself a nice dinner, I’d just make double, and she could have some if she wanted to. So, Thanksgiving came, and I made some chicken and potatoes. I fixed it in a way that she liked, and we watched a movie while it was cooking. When it was time to eat, we came down to the kitchen, and I brought the food into the dining room. I was talking about some subject long since forgotten, when I looked up and saw my friend frozen at the threshold of the dining room, looking scared. I asked what was wrong, and she said she felt embarrassed, but somehow, she just couldn’t look at the piece of chicken on the bone; the thought of it having been a bird was upsetting to her. She started to cry. Now, I know for a fact that your average person would have said, “Oh, for goodness’ sake. Don’t be ridiculous! It is a bird. Deal with it!” But I have had people say just those kinds of things to me too many times, and it just isn’t in me to go there. So, I just went over, gave her a hug, and asked what I could do to make the situation work for her. She asked me to take the chicken off the bone and cut up the chicken into small pieces, so I did just that. And while we ate, I blocked her view of my chicken pieces so that she could enjoy her meal. And she was happy—deeply and truly happy, in a way that only those of us who feel uncomfortable in so many places can truly understand. It was a small thing, but no small thing. After all, what’s more important than a person feeling safe and respected? And then I saw it: this is what I do. I create and hold safe space for other people. I deserve no credit for it because it’s just instinctive. It’s what I do, and I do it well. It’s the reason that during my daughter’s growing-up years, all the children having difficulties at home ended up gravitating to our house. It’s the reason that my daughter’s best friend lived with us for two months, and it’s the reason that I was ecstatic to be able to offer her a port in a storm. My gift for holding safe space also accounts for why my daughter’s entrance into the teenage years provoked such a crisis in me. After all the years of intensive child-raising and homeschooling, having my daughter go to school and become more independent made me yearn for the days that my work was simply to create a wonderful home life for her. As she’s grown, I’ve started joking that my current job consists of knocking on her door and saying, “Hi, hon. Need anything? No? Okay. Going now.” If I just concentrate on those few seconds, I feel obsolete. But when I realize that what I’m really doing is holding safe space for her—to walk into when she needs support, to enter when wants to talk something out, to feel secure in when she wants to share—I realize that I still have a critical job. My daughter needs me to hold the mother space, and it’s still a full-time task, because it entails taking care of myself and being present to what’s going on. Years ago, I had no idea that holding the mother space was just one iteration of what I do, but now it’s clear. Some time ago, I offered my art studio space to a friend who wanted to do programs with teens and young adults on the spectrum. After a half hour of conversation, he told me that much of the anxiety he’d been burdened by had begun to dissipate after sitting with me and getting my support. It was music to my ears. Truth be told, though, it’s kind of a strange job, holding the space. I keep thinking that I should, somehow, demand a place in the center. But that’s nonsense. I do have a place in the center. We’re all in the center. I don’t need to keep fighting for space with people. When I feel the need to compete for space, I’ve stopped creating spaciousness— and creating spaciousness is what I need to do. I hold safe space through my writing as well. I give people an opportunity to slow down, to read, and to reflect. Sometimes, I think that’s not enough. Sometimes, I catch myself feeling that I want to be part of something bigger, better, more important. But there is no such thing. There is only the illusion of it. After all, what could be more important than doing what I was born to do: speaking in my own voice, in my own way, for my own reasons, under my own power? And if one person reads my words and gets something out of them, I’ve done my job well. After all, one person isn’t simply a mark on a census form. One person is, after all, an infinite universe.