Who Am I? (Let’s Start with the Crisis) ‘In the social jungle of human existence, there is no feeling of being alive without a sense of identity’ – Erik Erikson1 Like many autistic people, I knew I was ‘different’ from a young age—and I knew that ‘different’ was not a good thing—so I constantly tried to be more like people wanted me to be. When you grow up as an undiagnosed autistic (or a diagnosed but masking autistic), you know you are not quite like other people, and you internalise this as ‘There is something wrong with me’. I often hear autistic people talk about the separate personas they put on for their interactions with different individuals or groups (and there are some great memes about the anxiety that arises when these personas intersect). In chapters 3, 21 and 25 I talk more about masking (hiding autistic behaviours) and the impact it has on an autistic person’s physical and mental health. For most of my childhood I was the ‘perfect child’—I spoke, acted and responded in the way that my parents expected of me. I liked the things I was supposed to like, I said the things I was supposed to say, and I (mostly) thought the things I was supposed to think. That’s not to say that I didn’t have ‘unacceptable’ behaviours and thoughts—I had both—but I learnt not to let people see my ‘weird’ behaviours2 and not to know my ‘weird’ thoughts. Primary school was pretty simple. I very quickly learnt what the teachers wanted me to do and say, so I did and said those things. I was often the teacher’s pet—the child who cleaned the blackboard and did all her homework on time. When I started school and the other kids were learning to read Dick and Dora, I was reading novels. The teacher divided the class into reading groups named after animals (we had the Lions, the Bears, the Zebras) and my group of one was called ‘The Lone Ranger’. I thought that was pretty cool at the time. Even at that point I was already aware that I was different from the other kids, but in my egotistical and immature head I had concluded that this difference was because they were all a bit strange. Every so often I would do or say something that was not ‘normal’ and I learnt how important it was to hide my oddities from other people. For example, when I commented on the lack of reading ability of my peers (in my very unsubtle way, I said, ‘I think I am in the wrong class, because all the other kids are stupid’), I was shocked by the reaction. My teacher told me I was rude, and the kids at my table made faces at me and called me names. Rude? Mean? I thought I was just stating a fact that had been overlooked by whoever allocated us to class groups. Once I settled in and learnt what not to say or do (at least while anyone was watching), I absolutely loved school. There are so many great things about it: routines that must be followed, rules that must be obeyed, and scheduled quiet times when you don’t have to cope with all the noise and movement. Better than that, there are facts to learn! You read, you listen, you learn. You complete your work quickly and neatly, perhaps sometimes too quickly because then you get bored waiting for the rest of them to catch up. But—and how cool is this—then the teachers start asking you to help the other kids, so you get to be the teacher, the conveyor of facts. And even better than that, there are books—so many books! There are books in the classroom, books in the library, the reassuring feeling of books in your bag and in your desk. I could never understand why the other kids wasted their recess and lunchtime playing games when they had the option of sitting in the library and reading. Sure, there were some things about primary school that were hard. The teachers had a really weird preoccupation with letting everyone have a turn in class. They would ask a question and I would just about wrench my arm out of its socket waving it in the air and bouncing up and down waiting for them to call my name to answer. The teacher would invariably ask, ‘Does anyone other than Sandra want to answer?’ This is not logical. You have a question, I have an answer, so why waste time on all these other kids who don’t? Then there was Sports (or Physical Education, as they call it now). I was bad at every sport.3 Every kid in the class knew that, so no one ever wanted me in their team. I was still the Lone Ranger, just at the opposite end of the list. But overall, I liked primary school. Then came high school. What a shock! Suddenly all the rules changed. Sure, the teachers still wanted you to be polite, follow the rules, and do all your homework. But where the other kids in primary school ignored me (which I was fine with), the kids in high school had their own sets of rules and expectations. Many of these were the opposite of those of teachers and parents. The teachers want you to do your homework on time and correctly; the kids hate you if a teacher praises you. The teachers want you to wear your uniform exactly as shown in the school handbook; the kids ridicule and taunt you if you don’t push back against the rules. I went from having a perfect attendance record to having a very patchy one. School filled me with anxiety and confusion, and I suffered from constant debilitating stomach-aches. As much as I wanted to please my parents and teachers and be the ‘good girl’, the consequences could be fairly dire. Teachers can tell you off and frown at you, but teenage girls can follow you down the road, threaten you, spit on you, get together in a group and use you as a punching bag. In the process of trying to be a ‘normal’ teenager, I developed an imaginary me. I was just trying her on for size—being her in my head while being the ‘good kid’ in real life. I had a diary that was very special to me,4 and in it I wrote wonderful tales of my adolescent adventures: crazy escapades with my wild friends; elaborate flirtations and romantic entanglements; breaking the law, vandalising, shoplifting; binge drinking and partying. Diary-me was crazy and popular and having fun. Then one day, my mum found and read my diary and was so upset that she put it in the fire. I found this out when she picked me up from school, visibly angry. She was furious that her ‘good girl’ had been secretly acting like an out-of-control rebellious teenager. I was furious that she had read and destroyed my diary. It never once occurred to me to tell her that what was written in the diary wasn’t true. I’m not sure why. Perhaps I thought she wouldn’t believe me. Perhaps I was too embarrassed to admit that I’d had to invent a reality in which I was cool and popular. With my parents mad at me, and my ‘good daughter’ persona crushed from existence, who was I? I had to be someone, and fit in somewhere, so I learnt how to be an ‘appropriate’ teenager. The rules were fairly simple once you learnt them. Give the wrong answer when called on in class. Learn to swear. Forget to hand in your homework. Start skipping the occasional class. Take up smoking. Sneak non-regulation clothes into your backpack so you can show up at school without the proper uniform. Keep doing those things long enough and you can convince yourself that this is who you are—just an average teenager, just like all the others. At the same time, I still wanted to be the person my teachers expected me to be. As uncool as it was, I loved learning and often felt like I had more in common with my teachers than with my peers. Juggling my multiple identities to try to keep everyone happy and be the ‘me’ that each group wanted me to be was exhausting. Eventually, of course, the wheels fell off. In Year 11 I went from being a straight-A student to failing my exams and dropping out of school. Fast-forward a few years and a few menial jobs, and I decided to get my high school certificate and enrol at university. I enjoyed university—in fact, I thrived at university. I think what saved me from repeating my high school failure was that I never saw university as a ‘social’ experience. I was several years older than most of the other students; add that to all my other differences and I just assumed I wasn’t going to fit in and didn’t try. I also saw my university studies as a serious task to complete: I was there to learn, not to make friends or have fun (well, except my version of fun, which was soaking up knowledge). Of course, university costs money, so I had to work. I got a job tending bar in a nightclub. Not a glamorous job, but a well-paid one and one that didn’t interfere with my classes. I was like a superhero in reverse: by day, an uber-serious university student who spoke to no one other than her lecturers and avoided all the frivolous social activities; by night, a vivacious barmaid who wore costumes over her uniform and tinsel in her hair. I don’t think I consciously processed that my nightclub colleagues didn’t do what I did: put on a personality along with their night-time clothes and take it off when they got home. Nor did I process the possibility that the other university students didn’t live completely different existences when they left campus (in part because I didn’t think much about them at all). It first hit me several years later— after I had graduated from university and worked my way up to a fairly senior position in the public service—when I visited a (different) bar with work colleagues. The man collecting our used glasses hugged me, said what a delight it was to see me after all this time, and offered to ask the boss if there were any vacancies for a barmaid.5 I continued to live my life, consciously striving to be the best daughter/friend/student/employee I could be but constantly feeling that I was not quite making it and I just had to try a little harder. There I was, in my forties, with the perfect life and everything I had always wished for: a wonderful husband, awesome children, a handful of university degrees, a great job, lovely colleagues and friends, a beautiful house in a nice neighbourhood. So why was I so unhappy? This was more than a midlife crisis. I was terrified that I was getting older and hadn’t ‘done’ anything, but I couldn’t work out what I needed to ‘do’. It took a long time before I realised what was missing from my life: it was me! I had spent so many years being who I thought I was meant to be, doing what I needed to do to meet everyone’s expectations and to avoid those soul-crushing moments when I realised I had disappointed someone by not being the perfect [insert whatever it was they wanted me to be], that somewhere along the way I had lost any connection with the real me, the weird/quirky/faulty person that I had been painstakingly hiding from everyone else. I realised that I didn’t actually know what I liked to do, what I was interested in, how I liked to dress, or what made me happy. Notes EH Erikson, Identity: Youth and Crisis, (Norton, New York, 1968), p. 130. More on this in Chapter 8. I now realise that this was a feature of my autism, not a failure on my part. If you are an autistic young person (or a parent of an autistic young person) who is experiencing the agony of sports, you might want to jump ahead to Chapter 6. The diary was a gift from my English teacher, an amazing person who not only took the time to share her love of books and writing with me, but also to see the confused teenager who hid behind the good grades. It was just a paperback homework diary, but on random pages she had written inspirational quotes about being yourself and being happy. Thank you, Mrs Hardwick—I hope somehow you know that I turned out OK. While I did not recognise him (see Chapter 18 on facial recognition), he clearly recognised me as a former colleague who had tended bar with him. (Why Do You Need a) Diagnosis? The realisation that I was autistic came slowly and in pieces. When I look back, the earliest inklings were in my adolescent years, and many other clues were spread through my adulthood, but I had never put the pieces together. When I was in junior high school I read Virginia Axline’s Dibs in Search of Self, the story of an emotionally disturbed young boy who learns to express himself through an extended course of play therapy. For anyone who hasn’t read the book (spoiler alert), Dibs is never labelled as autistic and probably would not meet the criteria for autism. However, if you look at reviews and blogs about this (now very dated) book, you will find that many people connect aspects of Dibs’ behaviour with autism. I loved that book—I was only twelve so I knew nothing of psychology or diagnostic criteria, but I identified with Dibs in a way that I had never before identified with a fictional character. When I was studying for my Bachelor of Arts degree, I took some psychology subjects and one of the topics we touched on was autism. I enjoyed learning more about this ‘disorder’ but sometimes struggled to understand why some of the characteristic (diagnostic) behaviours seemed to me to be very normal thoughts, feelings and actions. I was at the time seriously considering continuing with a psychology major and becoming a psychologist, but I was counselled by the university careers advisor that there weren’t many jobs for psychologists and that perhaps I didn’t have the ‘people skills’ for that career choice. I finished my degree, majoring in English Literature, and went on to complete a number of other degrees and progress through a series of jobs and careers. I didn’t give autism another thought. Then I became a mum. My first son had some difficulties in day care and preschool, with the teachers expressing the view, based on his energy levels and non-typical behaviours, that he had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). One medical professional suggested autism as a possibility, but I was not convinced. He was not like the autistic children I had read about. He was bright, articulate, funny, and loving. I thought he was perfect the way he was, but as he progressed through school he learnt to behave like everyone else—a pattern I should have recognised. My second son had more significant challenges and at two years old was diagnosed as autistic. Over the next few years I read everything I could find about autism, the bulk of which was—not surprisingly, given the prevailing wisdom at the time—about male children who experienced many of the same challenges and demonstrated many of the same characteristics as my son. For me ‘success’ was for him to be happy, to be able to communicate his needs, and to not harm himself or his brother. I will not go into detail here, as it is his story to tell if he chooses to tell it, but I will let you know that he has grown into a wonderful young man with a big heart and a great talent for creative writing, and he makes us proud every day. As the boys moved through school, from time to time I wondered whether my older son actually was also on the spectrum, but then I would think of how much he was like me and attribute his challenges to being shy and intelligent. When he began to struggle with social issues and relationships at high school and sought support, he was diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome (under the DSM-4 definition). Over the next few years he and I learnt more about Asperger’s. We nodded conspiratorially and shared many ‘a-ha’ moments and giggles as we saw so much of him in the things we read. While most of it was still about males, I was surprised by how much of it resonated with me and how many times I found myself thinking, ‘Wow, I thought he did that because he is like me, not because he is autistic.’ Again, I will not tell you his story as it is not mine to tell—other than to say that he has grown into an equally as wonderful young man. He has already exceeded my academic achievements and has a successful career as a university researcher, but also finds time to support and mentor others and is a true gentleman. As my children grew, I continued to learn about autism but it was a long time before I really processed the fact that females can be autistic: the books I read, the courses I studied, and my own personal experience all focused on boys. It was even longer before I began to accept that perhaps the many similarities between my own and my sons’ thoughts, behaviours and challenges were due to a shared neurotype rather than just shared genes. After pondering this possibility for about a year, I decided I had to voice it. My first tentative step was with my older son. I casually asked him, ‘Do you think it is possible that I am autistic?’ I was ready for him to laugh or express surprise at such a crazy thought, but instead he said, ‘Yes, I am sure you are. Where do you think we got it from?’ Over the next few weeks he and I had several conversations about this possibility, discussing our shared thought patterns, sensory reactions, mannerisms, and confusion with social rules. Next was my husband. With some trepidation, I asked him the same question: ‘Do you think it is possible that I am autistic?’ His response was not what I expected. He said, ‘I’ve known that since I met you.’ For some time, I sat with my self-diagnosis. I didn’t seek a formal diagnosis because I couldn’t see how it would be beneficial; I was too old for any kind of intervention or support. I was also concerned it would impact my career, given the stigma and stereotypes around autism I had experienced so often in my children’s lives. It was my older son who tipped me over the line in seeking a diagnosis, with a very persuasive argument that I had a duty to other autistic people to use my professional role and capacity to work for a more inclusive society. Both of my sons were clients of the same psychology practice, the ASD Clinic, which had been recommended to me as the experts in autism when we moved to Melbourne in 2014. After much encouragement from my family, I decided to broach the subject of my own autism with my younger son’s psychologist—the practice principal, with whom we had spent a great many hours. I was a bit nervous because I thought I had likely done such a good job of masking in front of him that he would reject the suggestion as ludicrous. At the end of one of our sessions, and with my husband there for moral support, I asked the ‘hand on the doorknob’ question: ‘Do you only do diagnostic assessments for children, or do you diagnose adults as well?’ He replied that the clinic did assessments for all ages and asked who I was thinking of. I said, ‘Um ... well ... I was just wondering ... if maybe I might be autistic’ and held my breath, waiting for him to laugh. To my surprise, his reply was: ‘You mean you don’t have a diagnosis already? I had assumed ... In my notes I have written “Mother is autistic”.’ So we made an appointment for a diagnostic assessment. I was a nervous wreck in the weeks leading up to it. I wasn’t worried that I would be diagnosed autistic as I had self-identified that way for some time and was comfortable with it: I was worried that I would be diagnosed non-autistic. What if autism wasn’t the explanation for my differences and challenges, and I was just a flawed neurotypical? The interview part of the diagnostic process was a bit of an eyeopener, so much so that I was really pleased to have my husband with me. I strongly recommend to anyone going through this process that you take someone with you who knows you well. If you are anything like me, you will be stuck in your lifelong pattern of giving the ‘correct’, socially desirable answer to questions. It is also really difficult when you have always been who you are to understand some of the questions in the context of how other (non-autistic) people perceive things. There were quite a few questions where I said ‘No, I don’t have any problems with ...’ and my husband added ‘except when ...’ or ‘What about ...?’1 The second part of the assessment was gruelling: it was a series of tests! Here I was, a person with an abject fear of failure and a strong need for control, who had gone through school with the absolute conviction that anything less than 100 per cent on an exam was tantamount to failure. Some of the tests were super-easy, some were a bit harder, and some seemed just about impossible. We went off to have a cup of tea (and a panic attack) while we waited for the psychologist to review his findings and reach a conclusion. By this stage I was fairly convinced he was going to say, ‘No, you are not autistic. You are a regular person with no social skills and a bunch of bizarre thoughts and behaviours. You just need to try harder.’ He didn’t say that. In brief, his report concluded that ‘Sandra has the history of impairments in social interaction and communication, sensory processing and restricted range of interests that are characteristic of disorders on the Autism Spectrum (DSM-5—Level 1) ...’ That day was a life-changer for me. Here was official confirmation that the challenges and problems I experienced weren’t a matter of not trying hard enough or not being good enough. I was different, not broken. As well as my diagnosis, the psychologist suggested books I could read to learn more about autism in women. I read all of them (and more). With each one, I found that more and more of the things about me that I was ashamed of and tried to hide from the world were just normal parts of being autistic, not character flaws unique to me. I know a lot of people are hesitant about seeking a diagnosis. Parents particularly have spoken to me about their reluctance to seek a diagnosis for their child, or to disclose a known diagnosis to the child. They express a reluctance to ‘label’ their child and worry that being identified as autistic will damage the child’s self-esteem. As a (very) late-diagnosed autistic woman, I would reframe both of those concerns. First, your undiagnosed autistic child will not be protected by the absence of a diagnosis: the labels other people will give them to explain their differences will be far worse. I know that growing up I would have been much more comfortable being referred to as ‘autistic’ than the terms regularly used by my peers to describe me—words like weirdo, freak, and others I wouldn’t want to put into print. Second, in my experience, it is a lot better for a person’s self-esteem to be a successful autistic person than a failed neurotypical person. Notes This process had a slight déjà vu feeling about it, as the interaction mirrored my older son’s diagnostic process except that I had been the one saying ‘What about when ...?’ To Disclose or Not to Disclose While having an official diagnosis brought me a sense of relief and helped me to understand some of my issues, it also presented me with a dilemma: who to disclose my diagnosis to, and when, and how. Telling my husband was easy, since he was there. Telling my older son was easy, because he was the one who had encouraged me to go through the formal diagnosis process and was quite convinced of what the outcome would be. Telling my younger son was interesting, as he was initially quite resistant to the idea. I suspect we had done such a good job of convincing him that his autism made him special that he didn’t want to grow the ranks of people as special as him. However, he very quickly adjusted to the idea and was happy to accept that the general quirkiness of his mum and his brother and himself was related to the shared diagnosis. The next step was to tell my close friends. That was made easier by the fact that I don’t have a large collection of them. I wish I could have told my late long-time friend and mentor Don, although I suspect that he knew many years before I received my official diagnosis. The more I read and learnt about autistic women, the more I realised just how much Don had done to teach me how to function in the neurotypical world of work. I started with a subtle approach, telling my closest friend by inference. He and his wife had invited me to dinner (more about that evening in Chapter 22). We were discussing my husband and his unwavering willingness to cater to the various dietary needs and sensitivities of myself and the children, and I made a comment about how hard it must be to be the only neurotypical person in the household. In my mind, this meant that I had explicitly told these friends that I was autistic. A few days later, he and I were chatting on the phone and both tiptoeing around the question. He had assumed that that’s what I was saying but hadn’t wanted to ask outright. When I did explicitly say, ‘Yes, I am autistic’, his reaction made me feel silly about ever worrying. As far as he was concerned, I was me, whatever label I did or did not have, and our friendship was solid. Next on the list was my boss at the time. He is a lovely human being and we get on very well, so this should have been a really easy one. However, when the time came I felt quite nervous. We were walking back towards the office from a meeting and the subject of autism came up. I started to say, ‘I don’t know if you realise that I ...’ and got a bit tongue-tied. He laughed and said, ‘You can finish the sentence,’ so I did. He said he had known for a long time, it made no difference, and I was a very valued member of his team. Slowly I started telling other friends and colleagues, one at a time and often with great trepidation about their response. I worried that I would receive the same response my older son had experienced when he first tentatively disclosed his diagnosis: ‘You can’t be autistic, because you have friends/do well at school/speak confidently ...’ I was finally developing a sense of who I was, and wasn’t sure how I would manage rejections of that identity. I needn’t have worried. Maybe I hadn’t always masked as well as I thought I had, or maybe I had particularly insightful friends, but the consistent response was ‘Yes, I knew that’ or ‘I was pretty sure you were’ or ‘Well, that makes sense’. No expressions of surprise or denial—just lots of acceptance and, in some cases, requests for information about autism so they could better understand how to support me. But still there was that warning note in my head, the one I had read about and that my family (and now my friends) cautioned me about: ‘Some people will use it against you. They will use your “disability” to discriminate against you or limit your opportunities.’ I knew from my experiences as a parent that this was an all-too-frequent occurrence. Countless instances from my younger son’s life are etched in my brain: the secondary-school drama teacher who didn’t let him audition for the school play, the numerous times it was recommended we keep him home from school events, the foregone conclusion that the school wouldn’t be able to find a ‘suitable’ work-experience opportunity for him ... So there I was, telling some people but not feeling brave enough to tell others. That’s the biggest disability that people with autism face: not the limits to our own abilities, but the limits that others impose on us based on prejudice and stereotypes. Then one day I got on a plane and ran into a colleague. She told me about a problem she was having with another colleague who had a reputation for being a bit difficult, and the trouble she was having getting him to shift from his perspective to hers. She finished with ‘Well, you know how X is—a bit on the spectrum.’ I didn’t know how to respond. I wanted to tell her how offensive her comment was (to autistic people, not to the colleague) but couldn’t find the right words. When I got to my destination and checked into my hotel, I picked up my laptop and wrote down how I felt when people made that kind of comment. I sent it to my husband and sons and asked them what they thought. My older son provided some corrections (as we always do for each other), but they were all incredibly supportive and said I should publish it. I sent it to an editor whom I had worked with at The Conversation, knowing it probably wasn’t the right fit for that outlet but also that my target audience could possibly be accessed through that platform. She is a lovely person and took the time to reply and encourage me to get it published: Thanks for sharing this—it’s a really powerful piece and I think it will really strike a chord with readers because we’ve all heard those comments about being on the spectrum. I’m afraid, though, that it’s not quite the right fit for The Conversation—it’s more of an op ed you’d see in one of the major dailies, rather than evidence-based analysis from researchers working in the sphere (despite your familiarity with the topic). I’d encourage you to pitch it to The Age or Herald Sun, as they have a bit more flexibility to publish personal takes on issues. I hadn’t thought about trying to target such a broad audience, but perhaps that was what I needed to do. I sent a copy to the university’s communications manager to seek her advice on whether I should send it with my university affiliation or as a private citizen. She offered to pitch it to the Sydney Morning Herald, and to my delight (and consternation) they accepted the article. I was hyper-anxious waiting for it to come out—delighted to have an opportunity to address this issue with such a broad audience, but nervous about the response from people I knew when they read it (would they be surprised? upset? disbelieving?). The article ran in July 20191 and was picked up and shared in a number of other print and online news sources. I was overwhelmed by the responses—letters, emails and social media comments. Total strangers contacted me to say how much the article meant to them. Autistic people, parents and families of autistic people, and teachers of autistic students reached out to say that it resonated with them and that they hear, and are hurt by, these casual insults. I also got some odd responses, such as the gentleman who contacted me to inform me that I couldn’t possibly be autistic because he has worked with autistic people and knows what they are capable of (I felt very sorry for the people who had to interact with him). I also received numerous emails and messages from friends and colleagues, including many I had not heard from in years. They congratulated me on my writing, my honesty, my ‘bravery’, but none of them expressed an iota of surprise or disbelief. Maybe I hadn’t hidden my differences as well as I thought I had. A word of caution. It would be misleading to imply that disclosure is without risk. We live in a world where ‘disability’ and ‘difference’ still carry stigma and stereotypes. At the point of my disclosure, I had been a successful manager for almost two decades. Subsequently, when I had a problem with a staff member I was surprised by the assumption of the human resources manager that the underlying cause was probably my communication skills, and the solution was for me to have training or coaching in people management. My disclosed autism provided a convenient solution to a tricky staffing issue: I was clearly the defective spoke in the wheel that needed to be fixed.2 On balance, I do not regret my decision to disclose. I had made it to a high level in my organisation constantly masking my autism for fear of other people’s judgements, but this had come at great personal cost. Masking is exhausting and takes a considerable toll on the physical and emotional health of autistic people. I had a raft of physical and psychological ailments that were a direct result of decades of forcing myself to be someone other than myself so that other people would accept me. I had already proven that I was good at my job. Now I needed people to understand that I wasn’t successful in spite of my autism but rather that my autism, while presenting some challenges, gave me strengths and characteristics that made me better at what I did. I needed to do it for myself so that I could stop masking and begin to restore my emotional equilibrium and physical health, and I needed to do it for my sons and other autistic people. As my older son pointed out to me, if at my professional level I couldn’t be open about my autistic strengths and challenges and advocate for the changes to my environment that I needed, what message was I sending to autistic people who were just starting their careers. PREPARING TO DISCLOSE People often ask me whether or not they should disclose their autism to others, particularly in a work context. I wish we lived in a world where the answer in every case is yes, but I have to acknowledge that there are still barriers to overcome and risks associated with disclosure. However, my life experience has taught me that the risks of not disclosing are also considerable. A lifetime of pretending to be someone else does immense damage to your physical and mental health. If you have made the decision to disclose, whether in a one-onone conversation with your best friend or a very public disclosure, there are some things you can do to make the process easier for yourself and for others. Be ready to educate When I started disclosing to friends and colleagues, many acknowledged that they actually knew very little about autism and expressed interest in learning more. As we all know, there is a lot of information out there and it varies widely from very accurate and helpful to completely inaccurate and harmful. When people ask this question they are typically asking about how you experience autism and what it means for you. For this reason, sending them off to find their own information can result in very little improvement in their understanding of your experience. Before disclosing, it is helpful to make a list of resources that resonate with you and your experience of autism so you are ready when people ask the question. Recognising that they have different amounts of time and enthusiasm for learning about autism, it’s good to include a range of sources—everything from links to brief tip sheets and one-minute videos to blogs, journal articles and books. That way, they can learn as much or as little about autism as they want, but at least you’ll be confident that what they’re learning is accurate and helpful. When I did this, probably because of my obsession with structure and detail, I categorised my list of resources under headings, which meant I had a simple one-page document with a list of topics that I thought were important, and links to resources that articulated the topics in ways that described my personal experience. An important part of being ready to educate is being ready to re-educate. Be wary of the well-meaning person who says, ‘I know a lot about autism because I read a book/saw a movie/spoke to someone once on a bus.’ These people are even more in need of your list of resources, but perhaps less open to receiving them. Be ready to advocate Perhaps the best question you can get from the people you disclose to is ‘How can I help you?’ or ‘What can I do to support you?’ Whether this question comes from family members, friends, colleagues, supervisors or casual acquaintances, this is your opportunity to ask for the things you need to make your life a bit easier. I strongly recommend that before you disclose you think about what you struggle with in your social or physical environment and how it could be addressed. Could your boss implement changes in your work environment to make it a little less draining? What could your friends do to make social events less stressful? I’m not suggesting that you enter into every conversation with a long list of demands like a prima donna rock star. However, when people ask what they can do to help you, it’s good to be able to give them some practical suggestions. It’s also good for you if they are willing and able to implement them! Be ready for denial Unfortunately, some people will not be ready for your disclosure. They may find it difficult to believe that you are autistic because you don’t fit their perception of an autistic person or because they have misperceptions about what autism is. Typical responses include ‘Are you sure?’, ‘Could you get a second opinion?’ and ‘I don’t think that’s right because I’ve known you a long time and you don’t seem autistic to me.’ In most cases people mean it in a positive way and think they are being supportive. This can be particularly challenging if, like many autistic adults, you have been masking most of your life —acting like everyone else, no matter how much of a toll it has taken on your physical and mental health. So the ‘you’ that people have been seeing may not be consistent with their understanding of what autism is, even if their understanding is reasonably accurate. Be ready for acceptance When I first started to disclose to friends and colleagues, I steeled myself for the expected reaction. I assumed that I had been masking so well that my diagnosis would be a shock to those who had known me for a long time. However, the most common reaction was ‘I have known that for a long time’ or ‘I thought you probably were, but you didn’t mention it so I didn’t.’ Here was I thinking I had done such a good job of being neurotypical that people would be unprepared for my disclosure! Be ready to continue to educate and to advocate While disclosure may be a ‘one-off ’ activity, educating and advocating need to be ongoing. If you learn something new about autism that you think will help non-autistic people to be more understanding, share it with them. If you realise there is something else people can do to make your environment more autism-friendly, tell them about it. Every little change will make your life just that much easier, and pave the way for a more supportive and inclusive society for all autistic people. Notes Sandra Jones, ‘Autism, A Neurotype not An Insult’, Sydney Morning Herald, 9 July 2019. As this book is not specifically about being autistic in a non-autistic work environment, I won’t go into detail about what followed (that’s the focus of a different book). What Is It ‘Like’ to Be Autistic? My number one tip on what not to say to an autistic person is: ‘I know how you feel’. The first problem is that you probably don’t know how they feel. The second problem is that they will probably believe that you do. One of the questions I get asked a lot (as do most autistic people) is ‘What is it like to be autistic?’ On face value that seems like a perfectly reasonable question, and it is often driven by a genuine desire to understand and support the autistic individual. The problem is that explaining what it is like to be autistic—beyond the formal diagnostic criteria—requires understanding what it is like to be not autistic. To explain how I am different from you, I need to understand how you are different from me. Autism is a lifelong condition. It may not manifest to the extent that people (typically parents) notice ‘differences’ and seek a diagnosis until toddlerhood, but that doesn’t mean a child ‘becomes’ autistic at age two, for example—just that their autism becomes apparent to others at that age.1 So that means when you ask me what it is like to be autistic, you are asking me what it is like to be me. How do I know which parts of ‘me’ are related to my autism and which parts are not? More importantly, how do I know what thoughts/feelings/experiences I have that you (as a neurotypical person) don’t have? The other really crucial element of a ‘lifelong’ condition is that, just as it doesn’t magically appear, it doesn’t magically disappear. We don’t ‘grow out of ’ autism, and doctors don’t ‘cure’ autism. The reason you see so many autistic children and so few autistic adults is that typically adults do one of two things. The first is that we become increasingly isolated and excluded from a society that doesn’t accept our differences (which is why employment rates are lower for autistic people than for people with other disabilities or without disabilities).2 You don’t see us because we stay home where we can be relatively safe. The second is that we learn to hide all of the things about ourselves that are ‘different’. We learn to act like a non-autistic person—this is often referred to as ‘masking’ or ‘passing’—which makes everyone else feel more comfortable but takes a huge toll on the autistic person. I hope that we will get to a point in the not-too-distant future when neither of those options is seen as acceptable, and that instead of waiting for us to ‘grow out of ’ our autism, society will support us to ‘grow in to’ our unique autistic selves. One day a colleague asked me for more information about autism and I started an online search (as you do) for short readings or videos to illustrate some of the challenges I experience. One of the resources I came across was a video entitled ‘Autism: Sensory Overload Simulation: A Representation of My Experience of Sensory Overload’—an autistic person’s replication of the sensory overload they experience out in the community. I watched the video, and then I watched it again. I was confused—it was pretty much just a video of what the world looks like to me every day. I showed it to my husband and discovered to my amazement that the world doesn’t look like that to him, or, apparently, to most non-autistic people. I tried another one, ‘What Is It Like to Have Asperger Syndrome?’—a representation of the auditory experience of an autistic person. Different focus, same result: to me, it was a very accurate snippet of what the world sounds like, but to my husband (and to most of the friends and colleagues I have since shared it with), it is the ‘a-ha’ moment when they realise why my senses hurt, why I seem distracted sometimes, and why I am so exhausted at the end of the day. Notes A discussion of proposed ‘causes’ of autism is beyond the scope of this book, but let’s be clear that vaccines do not cause autism. Australian Bureau of Statistics data from 2015 shows the unemployment rate for people with an autism diagnosis was 31.6 per cent—more than three times the rate for people with any disability (10 per cent) and almost six times the rate of people without disability (5.3 per cent). • • • • Part 2 What Are ‘Restricted, Repetitive Patterns’? To be diagnosed with autism under DSM-5, a child1 must have (among other criteria) at least two of four types of restricted, repetitive behaviours: stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech; insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualised patterns of verbal or non-verbal behaviour; highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus; and/or hyper- or hypo-reactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of the environment. What does this mean in the world outside a diagnostic manual? Chapters 5 to 13 describe my experiences, and understanding, of (as described in DSM-5) ‘Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities’. The use of the word ‘child’ is misleading. As noted elsewhere in this book, autism is a lifelong condition, not a childhood phase. That Smells Painful: Sensory Hypersensitivity The lights in my new office were way too bright. I couldn’t concentrate. I couldn’t focus on the papers I was reading or the person I was talking to. Every day by mid-afternoon I had a splitting headache. I woke up each morning dreading the coming day in the office. I contacted the building maintenance people and asked if they could come and fix my lights, and was delighted when the man arrived with his light meter. He took measurements, made some notes and off he went. I waited. Nothing happened. I called the maintenance people and was advised that the lights were fine—just the right level of lumens,1 if anything a bit on the dim side. I explained the headaches, the inability to concentrate and the fact that it was only when I was in that office that I had a problem. There must be a mistake. Maybe the machine was faulty. Could they check again? The next day, a different man came with a light meter and a notebook came. A few hours later, a notification email: ‘The lighting level in office X is within the recommended range of lumens for office work.’ A stand-off ensued. They would not ‘fix’ my lights because they weren’t broken; I couldn’t continue to work in an office that gave me daily headaches and made me feel permanently anxious. My lovely colleague in the next-door office, who had been watching this process, came up with a solution. He climbed up on my desk and taped pieces of paper over the lights, thus dimming the intensity to a level that was comfortable for me. We probably broke several occupational health and safety rules that day, but my anxiety levels came down and my headaches stopped. My whole life I have had intense sensory sensitivities, particularly in relation to sight and smell. The problem was that for a very, very long time I thought that everyone else experienced those things in exactly the same way as I did—largely because when I tried to express how I felt, well-meaning (or perhaps not always well-meaning) people would say, ‘I know how you feel.’ The message here was clear: ‘I experience that sensation the same way you do, so you need to stop complaining’ and ‘I cope with that sensation, so if you can’t cope with it you are weak or flawed.’ Sensory sensitivities are more than likes or dislikes—they are intense and often painful. Yes, we can ‘cope’ with them, but the consequences are significant. I don’t think I realised how significant until my psychologist suggested that I make a list of negative sensory experiences, share the list with my husband, and start addressing some of them (at home and at work). Following a presentation I gave to a group of speech pathologists, one of the questions I received was ‘How did you develop such an awareness of what you needed?’ This was my response: Slowly, painfully, and by trial and error. Like many women of my generation, I was not diagnosed until I was an adult. As a child, I was just different and weird and encouraged (forced) to mask the parts of me that weren’t like other people. After my sons were diagnosed, I read everything I could on autism and watched and listened to the boys so I could know what they needed, provide for it where I could, and fight for it where it was out of my hands (such as things at school). A lot of the adjustments I made for them also worked for me, which was great. After my own diagnosis, I worked with a terrific psychologist who got me to make lots of lists. What things made me comfortable? What things made me feel uncomfortable? What made me feel anxious? What made me feel calm? I also read a lot of books by autistic women and had lots of light-bulb moments (‘Yes, that describes exactly how I feel’). When I say trial and error, much of my understanding came from comparing the places on my lists to work out what was different between them. For example, I had always known that working in my office made me anxious and that having meetings in certain rooms gave me panic attacks, but it was only after my diagnosis and subsequent explorations that I identified the actual cause (the bright lights, the air conditioning, certain colours, etc.). SIGHT My biggest visual trigger is bright lights, and I have a fairly low threshold for what I consider to be ‘bright’. It is not just that I don’t like bright lights: if you sit me in a room with bright lights, I find it hard to concentrate on what I am doing, whether that is working on my computer, reading a book or listening to someone talk. I also experience feelings of extreme agitation, my heart rate increases, and I feel anxious and nervous. After a while—sometimes a few hours, sometimes only a few minutes—I will develop a headache. I have had a lifetime of headaches, ranging from mild (pop a couple of paracetamol) to extreme (bedridden, can’t speak, can’t see). I have tried a long list of different medications and therapies, and endured some horrible medical tests, including brain scans and a lumbar puncture, to try to identify the source of and solution to my debilitating headaches. For as long as I can remember, sunlight—even on a cloudy day—has been unbearable, and I never leave home without my sunglasses. But artificial lights are just as problematic, and they are everywhere: in every room in our house, in every office and meeting room at work, in shopping centres. When I used to drive a car,2 I avoided driving at night because the glare of car headlights and streetlights was so intense that I found it virtually impossible to focus on the road ahead. I also tried to avoid going out at night as a passenger as I knew I would end up with a headache before I even made it to our destination. Pre-diagnosis, I assumed that either (a) everyone had the same issue with lights as I did and they coped without complaint (so I just needed to put up with it), or (b) this was one more weird thing about me that had no explanation (so I just needed to put up with it). So I ‘coped’. I was constantly overwhelmed with the distraction and pain caused by artificial lights, but I pushed through because that was what ‘normal’ people did. The exception was that my husband had all the lights in our house fitted with dimmer switches, and he warns me before he turns a light on. He also keeps spare sunglasses in the car for me, and instinctively bought fancy sunglasses for our older son so he would have less sensory-related anxiety when he started driving. Post-diagnosis, as I read more about autism (and particularly how it presents in women), I realised that this was one more indication that I was a normal autistic person, not a damaged neurotypical one. This gave me the courage to start making adjustments to my behaviour and in my environment to make life more comfortable. Being able to wear my sunglasses in a really bright room or ask for dimmer switches to be installed in my office have made a huge difference to my productivity and my anxiety levels. People may look at me strangely when I do the shopping with my sunglasses on or wear them when I am out in the car at night, but I feel a lot calmer and more able to focus on what I am doing. I also have fewer headaches. One of the things I have realised is that while people who don’t have these hypersensitivities can empathise, this doesn’t mean they can intuitively know where an autistic person’s threshold is. For example, I am an avid jigsaw puzzler and find that half an hour at the end of the day on a puzzle helps me to de-stress from work and prepare my brain for interaction with the family. On a number of occasions my husband has come into the room and helpfully turned up the dimmer switch: he perceives that at the low brightness setting I have selected, I am sitting in the dark and have forgotten to turn up the light; I perceive that at the setting he chooses, I am doing my puzzle in the glaring lights of an operating theatre. Other visual triggers can be hard to explain but easier to avoid as they are a less consistent feature of my world than bright lights. Narrow stripes or checks cause me visual disturbances, feelings of anxiety and headaches; this only becomes a problem if I am in a meeting with someone who is wearing a stripy shirt and I’m trying to focus on what they are saying and to not grimace with pain when I look at them. Bright yellow (the colour, regardless of the object) is an anxiety trigger for me, which is tricky because yellow is my younger son’s ‘happy’ colour.3 Pre-diagnosis, I was not consciously aware that these were such visual triggers for me—I just knew that in some meetings with some people or in some places I felt very anxious, found it hard to concentrate, and left with a headache. I also knew that sometimes when I was getting ready for work in the morning and looked at myself in the mirror, or caught a glance of myself in the mirrored walls of the elevator at work, I felt queasy and agitated. I assumed that it was the beginning of a headache and did not make the connection with what I was wearing. Once I worked it out, I gave away all my clothes with stripes! SMELL My sensitivities to smell are extreme and wide-ranging, and often hard to escape (especially if I don’t want to offend people). Sometimes I will find a smell really intense that seems to be almost undetectable to others. This is not an uncommon scenario in our house: Me: Where is that overpowering citrus smell coming from? Husband: I can’t smell anything. Me (hunting through the kitchen drawers): It’s coming from in here ... It’s these garbage bags! Husband (as I hold the offending item up under his nose): I guess it could be. Those are the lemon-scented garbage bags I bought, but the smell is pretty faint.4 Some of the smells I struggle with are ones that neurotypical people also find unpleasant, such as paint, bleach and vomit, so I can articulate these without offence. When we were renovating our house, I had to stay somewhere else on the days it was being painted (and for several days afterwards). It wasn’t just that I ‘didn’t like’ the smell: I couldn’t think, read, talk or function as it totally overpowered my senses. I use natural or unscented cleaning products because the chemical smell of many commercial products gives me nauseating headaches; if someone uses bleach to clean the bathroom, I can’t go in there for several days. While other people may not understand the intensity of the pain that these smells cause me, they typically agree that they are unpleasant (and yes, they say they ‘know how I feel’). Other smells I find painful are ones that are generally agreed to be mildly unpleasant (such as insect spray) or disliked by some (such as parmesan cheese). While people might not understand the level of discomfort these smells cause me, they generally accept that I don’t like them. At home, they are easier to manage. I can eat in another room if my husband and sons put parmesan on their spaghetti. My younger son shares my aversion to insect spray, so he valiantly chases flies with a flyswat and carefully carries spiders outside. At work it is a little trickier. For example, if a colleague walks into the lunch room with a parmesan-topped midday meal, I can’t just get up and leave without causing offence; and I can’t insist that my workmates don’t use air freshener in the office bathroom. I also learnt as a child that it is not OK to comment on the fact that people smell too strongly, so I hold my breath in elevators! A great suggestion (especially for meetings and lectures) that I received from an autistic friend is to get a scented chapstick or essential oil you like and apply it under your nose to block out smells that disturb you. What can be harder to explain to people are those smells that cause me distress but other people think are pleasant. Perfumes, aftershaves and deodorants smell intense and painful to me. If one of my family members uses a spray-on deodorant in the room I am in, or walks past me within an hour of using it, I feel agitated and queasy. If we are going out in the car and my husband has just showered and applied deodorant (which is considered socially appropriate by most people), I need to roll the windows down to avoid developing a nasty headache. My family are used to this, so they are not offended when I pull away from a hug or walk out of a room when they walk in, but other people, including work colleagues, friends and strangers, tend not to be so understanding. So, more holding my breath in elevators! SOUND Sensitivity to sound is complex. For me it is a combination of what the sound actually is, how loud it is, whether I am expecting it, and whether I can control it. Let’s take music as an example. What the sound is: I love certain types of music (country music, happy songs), dislike certain types of music (rap, heavy metal), and am bemused by some types of music (classical music—how is it a song if there are no words?). How loud it is: Even with my absolute favourite music, I don’t like it excessively loud. Whether I am expecting it: When my husband turns the key in the car ignition and music bursts out, or someone turns on the radio in the kitchen without warning, my anxiety spikes, even if it is my favourite song playing. This extends to whether I can anticipate when it will end. For example, if the neighbours have a party and I know what time the music will stop, I can (somewhat) manage my anxiety. Whether I can control it: I get anxious when I don’t have any control over the type of music (for example, in a shopping centre), the volume of the music (for example, neighbours) or the duration of the music. Those elements are cumulative, so experiences that combine them can be absolutely overwhelming. I used to love scrolling through Facebook Marketplace, then they introduced sponsored ads (irritating, but OK), and then they introduced sponsored ads with music. There I am, happily scrolling, and suddenly there is a burst of music. I don’t expect it, I can’t control it, it is loud, and it can be just about any tune. Now Facebook Marketplace is a sensory nightmare that sends my anxiety through the roof. If you are reading this, Facebook, can you add a ‘Turn it off ’ feature, please? Some very quiet sounds that are pleasant, or even undetectable, to other people can be uncomfortable or painful for autistic people and others with sensory processing issues. Ticking clocks are the top of my list. If I am in a room and there is a clock ticking, I hear the clock ... It takes over my ears ... I can’t shut it out ... I can’t focus on the conversation ... My heart is racing. My mother loves clocks and has one in every room. Growing up, my nemesis was the beautiful, big (and loud) grandfather clock in the hallway; sleeping with a scarf wrapped around my ears and the pillows over my head was the only way for me to muffle the sound. I loved those rare days when Mum forgot to wind it and it stopped ticking. My older son tells me he has the same experience—but apparently he had the words (and the wisdom) to articulate it when he went to visit my parents. Grandad would turn off the clock for him. A common experience for autistic people is limited capacity to single out and isolate specific sensory inputs. This is particularly evident with sound. When I am in an environment with multiple sounds, I hear all of them and often at the same (or very similar) volume. When we are driving and my husband asks, ‘Can you hear that?’, I find the question confounding. I can hear the sound of the engine, the wind blowing, other cars, the radio, my husband breathing, and our son snoring (he always falls asleep in the car). My husband can hear a tiny sound coming from the dashboard and can detect and isolate a subtle difference in the car’s ‘normal’ sound. I can probably hear that sound too, but the difference is that he can isolate that sound from all the others and focus on it. Some days I wish I could do that. When I meet a friend in a cafe for a catch-up, I feel like it is a success if I hear and process more than 10 per cent of what they tell me. Yes, I am listening intently to what they are saying, but at the same time I am hearing the piped music, the people talking at the next table, cars driving past, the coffee machine, people shuffling their chairs, and the opening and closing of the door. Wouldn’t it be great if cafes had sound booths where you could sit and talk to a friend without trying to fight through all those competing noises? I didn’t realise until after my diagnosis that neurotypical people don’t experience sound like I do. The first inkling came when I was at a work conference and one of the speakers played a video about a program they were running with students. The video consisted of snippets of activity interspersed with clips of students talking to camera. However, it also had a musical track that made it impossible for me to work out what the students were saying. I was sitting next to my boss and when the session ended I turned to him intending to say, ‘What an awful video—those poor students were speaking but you couldn’t hear what they were saying.’ Fortunately, he spoke first. Boss: What a great video. We need to make something like that to promote our program. Me: I thought it was awful—those poor students trying to talk over the music. I couldn’t work out what they were saying. Boss: Do you mean the background music? I hardly noticed it—I was too engrossed in listening to the students. I spent the morning tea break subtly asking others what they thought of the video. They all loved it or only had issues with specific images or examples. No one mentioned the deafening background music. By the tenth confirmation I realised that everyone else had the same ability as my husband: they could listen to one sound and ignore others. Perhaps this was why no one else I know (other than my older son) has the sound permanently turned off on their phone and tablet so they can watch videos without the music overpowering the message. (Of course, the downside of this is that we regularly miss phone calls on our silent phones.) I was fifty-two. I had been ‘me’ for fifty-two years. I had been autistic for fifty-two years. I had never realised that other people can watch a video with people talking and music playing and actually separate out the two sounds and focus on just one of them. I thought everyone heard what I heard. I knew I was hypersensitive to sound and struggled to follow a conversation in a room with other sounds and distractions, but I did not realise that other people’s brains could so effectively filter out one sound and focus on another. TASTE? I have a question mark at the end of the ‘Taste’ heading quite deliberately, as I struggle sometimes to work out the extent to which my issues with food are about taste or about texture (technically, touch). Some of my food issues are easy to understand and explain. I have a severe allergy to gluten and lactose. If I eat foods that contain either of these, I have clear (and visible) symptoms: I feel nauseated, I get stomach cramps, my abdomen swells up and I look like an egg on legs. Most people understand those conditions, and it is increasingly easy to purchase allergy-free foods. Some of my food issues are clearly ‘taste’ issues: I don’t like the taste of coffee, beer or grapefruit. Some of my food issues are ‘novelty’ issues: I don’t like things that are new, different or unexpected, so if I haven’t eaten something before I will naturally assume that I won’t like it. But many of my food issues are more about texture than taste, which makes them hard to explain and hard for (non-autistic) people to understand. My younger son cannot eat baked beans. He has tried to eat them, particularly when a nutritionist suggested they were a good way to add protein and fibre to his diet, but the ‘feel’ of beans in his mouth causes him such intense discomfort and sensory overload that he physically retches. I actually like baked beans but can understand why they cause him so much distress, because I cannot eat chickpeas or lentils or similarly textured foods without the same reaction. I really like minestrone, but I need to carefully pick out all the beans and chickpeas before I can eat it. I love marmalade on toast as long as I can pick out all the pieces of citrus peel. I grew up in a generation where people—and particularly children—were expected to eat everything on their plate. You did not leave the table until your plate was clean. I know there were good reasons behind this: many of our parents grew up in a time when food was scarce, so wasting food was unacceptable, and the commonly accepted belief was that if you didn’t make children eat everything on their plate, they would grow up to be fussy eaters with nutritional deficiencies. My nemesis was the fat on meat (steak, chops, roast beef, etc.). My parents did not understand (and nor did I at the time) that this wasn’t the usual ‘fussy kid’ problem that could be overcome by insisting I eat this nutritionally important part of the meal. I would try every trick in the book to leave the fat on my plate and would delay eating it as long as possible—in retrospect a very poor decision, as it was even worse cold. I do not eat red meat, and to this day I have a visceral reaction to the sight of a piece of meat with visible fat on it.5 At home, as an adult, this is easy to manage. My husband understands the need to ensure that food is cooked with ‘no bits’ (our shorthand for the textures we cannot handle). In public places, such as restaurants, it can be a little bit tricky. Careful reading of the menu can avoid most inedible ingredients, and then we can do some subtle shuffling of food into piles and discreet swapping of plates. What is really problematic is being invited to someone’s house for dinner. Most people understand ‘no gluten’ and ‘no lactose’, but they typically struggle with ‘no bits’. That means I am stuck with the tough choice between forcing myself to eat something that takes all of my sensory processing capacity (so I can’t talk or listen) or offending my host by leaving little piles of food on the plate.6 TOUCH One of my biggest ‘a-ha’ moments following my diagnosis was the realisation that a lot of my anxiety and agitation stems from things I touch—or, more accurately, things that touch me. I have always known that I can’t wear some fabrics because the feeling of them against my skin is beyond irritating. Wool makes me itch so badly that I feel like I need to scratch off all my skin. I can tell from fleetingly touching something if it contains as little as 10 per cent wool—my skin gets a horrible prickly feeling with the lightest touch. Synthetic materials (nylon, polyester, viscose) make me perspire and feel agitated. These things are relatively easy to avoid by choosing fabrics and clothes in which I feel comfortable, although it can be tricky if a family member tries to hug me when they are wearing a wool sweater. What I hadn’t realised was that a lot of the other things that drive me mad about my clothing and furnishings are due to sensory hypersensitivity: they are not things that everyone else feels and just puts up with. As with many of my other issues, my rationale was that if everyone else could cope with it, then I just needed to toughen up. Looking back, that is pretty silly, given the battles I fought with my son’s school over his uniform (‘No, I won’t make him wear the school jacket, because the elastic in the sleeves makes it impossible for him to concentrate’; ‘No, he can’t wear the school sweater because the collar hurts his neck’).7 It was a revelation when I saw a cartoon that visually represented the difference between how neurotypical people and autistic people ‘feel’ tags in their clothes. When I complained to my parents that ‘The tag in my shirt prickles’ or told my husband that ‘The seams are itchy’, it was like I was speaking in Latin and they were hearing in Japanese. Now I immediately cut the tags out of new clothes before I wear them. (I also wash them at least twice to make sure that any remnants of itchy dyes have gone.)8 I can’t handle anyone (including myself) or anything touching my eyes. This means a definite no to contact lenses, eyeliner, mascara and—as I talk about in Chapter 7—eye tests. As a teenager and young woman I forced myself to wear eye make-up because that was what you did. I could shower, dry my hair, and do most of my make-up in less than ten minutes, but it took another twenty to thirty minutes to do my eyes. I read all the guides in the magazines and tried every tip—look up, look down, look sideways. The only thing that worked was to hold my eyelid in a grip of steel with one hand and apply the eyeliner and mascara with the other. Usually that meant half-a-dozen attempts that resulted in me blinking, flinching, and getting the mascara everywhere other than on my eyelashes until eventually by luck as much as skill I got a passable amount in the right place. One of the definite upsides of becoming a ‘woman of a certain age’ is that people focus less on your appearance; I haven’t worn make-up for the past few years. I have also discovered that hypersensitivity and hyposensitivity can coexist. My youngest son is, like me, hypersensitive to things touching his skin—tags, seams, elastic—but his reaction to physical touch is quite different from mine. He struggles with light, gentle touches (to the extent that when he was a child, haircuts were a nightmare) but is comfortable with firm, strong pressure (brushing his teeth is unpleasant but having the dentist scrape the scale off his teeth is no big deal). Notes A lumen is a measure of the amount of brightness of a lightbulb—the higher the number of lumens, the brighter the lightbulb. My reasons for not driving are complex: see Chapter 6. My son and I have a theory (although no scientific evidence) that this might be a psychological thing. My trigger colour is bright yellow and his is red. In school sports, I was in ‘Gold faction’ and a generation later he was in ‘Red faction’. Given our horrendous experiences with school sports, we suspect there might be a link there. When my older son read this, he commented that his partner eats mandarins at the office rather than at home because she knows he has trouble with the citrus smell. Recently he found himself wondering where she went in the middle of watching a TV show: she was in the kitchen eating a mandarin next to the extraction fan so it wouldn’t bother him. When I was a teenager I used to read MAD magazine. Almost four decades later I still remember the issue where they did a parody of Archie comics and one of the characters force-fed someone chicken fat for some reason. That image is tattooed on my brain and still appears in my nightmares. This combines with my social anxiety to the point where I avoid social interactions that may involve food. Mum (and my high school teachers), if you are reading this, now you know why I managed to ‘lose’ so many school sweaters. Finding comfortable clothes can become a nightmare in dressing ‘appropriately’ for work. Oops, Sorry … Proprioception: The ‘Other’ Sixth Sense When I was a child, the absolute worst thing about school was sports. Every week it was another opportunity to engage in an activity that I would certainly fail at, to the amusement and derision of my peers. I was the kid who could never manage to hit the ball with the bat, hit the shuttlecock with the racquet, catch the ball that someone threw to me, or kick the ball on the ground. I was also the only kid in the class who could not hit the T-ball. For those who have never experienced this torture device, it is a pole on which you place a softball so you can hit it. It is meant to be easy. You don’t have to track the ball as it hurtles towards you at great speed—it is right there in front of you and it is not going anywhere. Except in my case, the ball literally wasn’t going anywhere. I would hold the bat just as they told me to, swing my arms just as instructed, and hit the pole or hit nothing but air. Initially this was a great source of entertainment for the rest of the class, but when they realised that the teacher was going to make me keep trying until I actually got the ball to do more than fall off the pole onto the ground, they quickly became annoyed that I was holding up the game. School sports were my nightmare—so much so that eventually my parents took me to a psychologist who wrote a note to the school requesting that I be excluded because it was damaging to my mental health. That may seem extreme or humorous to some people, but it was disturbingly true. School sports combined my physical limitations with my two greatest psychological weaknesses: my fear of failure and my problems with social interaction. There is nothing like being put in the position, week after week, where two ‘captains’ select their teams one by one (‘I’ll have Jenny’ ... ‘I’ll have Mary’) and knowing that when you are the only person left there will be a groan from whichever team ends up with the ‘unco’ kid.1 Of course, sports aren’t the only activity that require coordination. I have spent my life falling down (and up) stairs, walking into stationary objects, and banging my limbs on furniture. On any given day, I will be sporting one or two bruises along with various cuts, burns, and other minor injuries. I was always a clumsy kid, and I grew up to be a clumsy adult. As a general rule these bumps and bruises are just a minor inconvenience at home, but they can be a little more serious when I’m out in the world. Most times if I step in front of a moving car, the driver will stop, swerve or beep their horn and I will arrive home unscathed. But one unfortunate time I stepped in front of a bus and woke up in an ambulance; there was no permanent damage to me but I experienced the demise of my favourite sweater and the embarrassment of being reprimanded for not paying attention to the traffic. Eating is a messy activity. I know where my mouth is and I know where the fork or spoon is, but somehow that doesn’t always translate to the food ending up in my mouth rather than on my chin, my clothes, the table or the floor. My family is used to this, so much so that my husband serves up my dinner along with a tea towel or other item I can use as a bib. It can be a little trickier at work, but I have developed some good coping strategies: never accept the finger food offered at stand-up functions, as you know you will spill more than you eat; and always wear something dark-coloured (and maybe bring a spare) if you know there is a meal involved. I learnt this last one when I attended a breakfast function at which I was the keynote speaker and discovered that if you spill yoghurt on a black suit there is nothing you can do to hide it. I always thought I was clumsy and that, as with so many other areas in my life, I just had to try harder. Then I started learning more about proprioception—‘the sense through which we perceive the position and movement of our body’—and discovered that many autistic people have proprioception challenges. I had a rudimentary understanding of proprioception—for example, that it explained why I (and my sons) think that weighted blankets are the greatest invention since the wheel. It is hard to explain to a neurotypical person why I have trouble going to sleep and staying asleep, why I need to sleep with my arms under my body, and why I can’t sleep in a big bed where I can’t feel the edges. From the first night I slept under my weighted blanket, it was magic: suddenly I knew where my edges were even when I was in between awake and asleep.2 I first realised the link between proprioception and bumping into things by accident (no pun intended) following a very well-intentioned comment by my husband. He suggested that perhaps one of the reasons I bump into so many things, and people, is the fact that I look at my feet while I am walking. The concept that other people can walk without looking at their feet was new to me, so I googled ‘walking look at feet’ and found myself on a website that described ‘abnormal proprioception’. The list of signs and symptoms read like someone was describing me. Balance issues, such as having trouble standing on one foot or frequent falls while walking or sitting—tick. As an adult I had tried a range of non-team activities to stay fit. I love the concept of Pilates and yoga but could never master the poses that require me to stand on one leg. Everyone else in the class looked graceful as I wobbled and swayed and constantly put my foot down to stop myself from falling. Uncoordinated movement, such as not being able to walk in a straight line—tick. I remember the first time I heard the concept of a ‘sobriety test’. According to television shows, it is one way that police officers can test whether you are sober enough to drive. I tried it stone-cold sober, and would definitely fail such a test. In school sports, I was always the one who strayed into another runner’s lane; luckily I was such a bad runner that they were always a considerable distance ahead of me, so I didn’t cause any harm. Clumsiness, such as dropping or bumping into things—tick. Unfortunately, it isn’t just inanimate objects that I bump into: I regularly collide with people. As a child I was constantly told to ‘Look where you’re going.’ I grew up very conscious that I was clumsy and awkward, to the frustration of my family and my deep and enduring embarrassment. I was the one who walked to school tripping over objects and banging into those barriers they put up to stop cars entering walkways, and I still remember the day I managed to knock myself out with a tree branch, to the great amusement of fellow students. I try really hard not to do it: when I am walking along a street I covertly watch the people coming towards me, thinking carefully where I need to be so as not to bump into them, but somehow I manage to bump into them anyway. I am fortunate to have a caring husband and two ever-watchful sons who gently steer me through crowds and warn me of oncoming obstacles. Poor postural control, such as slouching or having to place extra weight on a table for balance while sitting—tick. One of the constant refrains from my childhood was ‘Sit up straight. Don’t slouch.’ I tried, I really did, and at fifty-something I still get reminded to sit up straight. My husband is a lover of gadgets and bought me a neat little device that you put on your back and it buzzes each time you slouch. I lasted a whole two days until the constant buzzing drove me crazy. This is another reason I struggle with yoga, Pilates and other mat-based fitness activities. I was constantly reminded by the instructor to ‘Keep your neck flexed’ (I thought I was doing that) and ‘Keep your back straight’ (I thought I was), and would spend so much energy trying to make sure all my parts were in the right place that I would miss the fact that the class had all moved on to the next activity. Trouble recognising your own strength, such as pressing a pen too hard when writing or not being able to gauge the force needed to pick something up—tick. Another comment I have heard regularly throughout my life is to ‘not [x] too hard’. Apparently when I type I press the keys too hard (whether on a computer or, back in the day, a typewriter), and I have often been asked whether I am angry or, on a typewriter, to type more quietly. My awareness that I am a terrible judge of how much or how little strength I need made me extremely wary of babies for many years. I was always reluctant to hold the babies of friends and family members, not because I didn’t like babies but because I was terrified that I would hold them too hard and hurt them, or too softly and drop them. Avoiding certain movements or activities, such as climbing stairs or walking on uneven surfaces, because of a fear of falling—tick. Stairs are my nemesis. When we renovated our house we had an internal staircase built in. Prior to the renovation, going from downstairs to upstairs required going out the front door, up an external staircase, and back inside the house again. I am really happy that we have the new staircase as it definitely beats going outside in the dark and cold when I want to use the bathroom. But, a year after having the internal staircase installed I still go carefully up and down, putting both feet on each step before going to the next, all the while holding on to the handrail. I have a recurring nightmare about moving into a new house and finding myself stuck on the top floor because coming down requires negotiating complicated, treacherous-looking staircases. Growing up as the clumsy one in my family, it was perhaps not surprising that when I was finally brave enough to get a driving licence this provided comic relief for some members of my family: ‘Better stay home today, the roads aren’t safe, Sandra’s driving ...’ In reality, there was some accuracy to their jibes. I had two car accidents in my first year of driving—one that badly damaged my car and one that wrote it off—but luckily neither I nor anyone else was injured. There was a link between those two accidents. The first one, shortly after I got my licence, occurred when I was turning right at an intersection and was hit by a vehicle travelling in a straight line from the opposite direction. The second, a few months later, occurred when I was turning right at an intersection, saw a car heading towards me, and accelerated. Legally (according to police called to the scenes), neither accident was my fault: in the first instance the other driver was speeding, and in the second the driver came through a red light. The severity of the consequences, however, caused me to reconsider driving. The first accident could be attributed to my being a novice driver, as a more experienced driver would likely have realised that the oncoming vehicle was travelling at an excessive speed and would not have turned. The second should have been a near miss—I was partway through the intersection, realised the other car wasn’t stopping, and accelerated to get out of its way. In theory I should have shot into the empty lane and experienced nothing more than a scare; instead, I drove head first into a traffic light.3 I did not drive for many years after that, until the day a friend asked me to move her car out of a car park. It was a simple request—no traffic, no traffic lights, not travelling very fast—but somehow I managed to drive her car into the wall of a building. It was one of those times that I wish I had known then what I know now about proprioception. What links my second accident to this third accident was not lack of awareness of where the car was or where the other vehicle/building was, but lack of awareness of where I was—in particular, where my hands were in relation to the turn of the steering wheel in the former, and where my feet were in relation to the brake/accelerator in the latter. My whole life I have struggled with motion-activated devices: electronic doors that don’t open when I approach them, automatic soap dispensers that don’t dispense soap when I put my hand out, restroom dryers that don’t blow air when I put my hands under them. I wish I could blame it on faulty equipment, but I can watch another person dry their hands with ease and then nothing happens when I approach the machine. As a child I thought that perhaps I was invisible or ephemeral and that the machines couldn’t see me, so I would wait patiently at the electronic door for someone else to come through, and dry my hands with a paper towel. As I got older I realised that clearly I wasn’t invisible (because if that superpower had been available to me I would have been able to hide from the kids who made my life miserable). When I asked (neurotypical) friends about this, they were bemused and typically said, ‘No, I have never experienced that. What do you mean?’ So, I stopped asking and just accepted that it was one more weird thing about me that I needed to hide. Recently I saw a poll on a Facebook group for autistics that asked whether people had trouble activating restroom dryers, automatic soap dispensers, electronic doors and other motion-activated devices. I immediately voted yes, and was surprised to discover that almost three-quarters of the responses were affirmative. Now, as a researcher I know that there are all kinds of problems with interpreting such data (for example, the poll was only open to members of the group; and people who had experienced the issue would be more likely to notice and respond to the poll), but it meant that there were many other people who had a similarly difficult relationship with these devices. Reading the poll got me thinking. Here is my theory (and note that I have zero scientific evidence to support it). Logic tells me that (a) inanimate devices can’t just choose to ignore us because we are autistic, and (b) inanimate devices can’t move, so they are exactly where we think they are. That leaves one explanation: maybe the reason that motion-activated devices don’t work for us is because we don’t know where we are? As I have grown in to my autism, I have been more accepting of my proprioceptive limitations and (sometimes) more open to sharing with others why I do things in a particular way. I forgive myself when I bump into things and, much to the delight of our dog, am more accepting of the fact that I will drop some of my dinner on the floor (and less self-conscious about the spare bits of food I find down the front of my shirt or in my lap when I stand up). I accept the help of my family with things that I find difficult: I am happy for my husband to carry my teacup up the stairs so I can focus on my feet; I am grateful when my son jumps up to get my pie out of the oven so I don’t burn myself again. When I go to the doctor or the physiotherapist and they comment on my latest fresh set of bruises, I no longer get embarrassed or feel the need to explain that all of the injuries are self-inflicted but not intentional. My proprioception challenges still cause me some issues at work: I bump into people, I fall off chairs, I spill glasses of water (mine and other people’s), I struggle with motion-activated lights and doors. I also find that my social anxiety and my proprioception sometimes battle with each other. For example, if I pour you a drink I will probably spill it, but if I don’t pour you a drink you might think I am rude; if I help gather up all the plates after an event, it is highly likely that I will drop food on myself or someone else, but if I don’t help, people might think I am inconsiderate. Notes For anyone who didn’t go through life being called this, ‘unco’ is kid-speak for uncoordinated. The best description I have seen of this feeling was a response to a query in an online autism group as to whether people tuck their hands under or in between their legs (which received several hundred ‘yes’ responses): ‘How else am I supposed to know where all my body parts are? If they’re just in the air, I can’t feel them.’ This was a very expensive error. Not only was my car wrecked, but it ripped the traffic light out of the ground. As the other driver took off and was not identified, and it was my car that hit the traffic light, I was required to pay for its replacement. 5 + 1 = 27: Sensory Hypersensitivity Is Exponential An annual eye examination may seem like a minor thing, but for me it is a really challenging experience. I am fine with the actual vision test (‘Look at the chart and tell me what letters you can see’); it is the part before that I struggle with. The ‘eye health’ check combines my hypersensitivity to light with my hypersensitivity to touch. I totally understand why it is important to test the pressure in my eyes,1 but the level of anxiety I experience when they say ‘Hold still, don’t blink, and we are just going to put three quick puffs of air into your eye’ is hard to explain. I can usually force myself to keep my eye open for the first puff, but the second and third are really tough. Now I know exactly what is coming and my entire body is wound up like a spring. Then, while I am still shakily recovering comes the dreaded ‘Now, we’ll just do the other eye’. But that’s not the worst of it. Next comes the part where they shine a bright light into my eye.2 I tell them I am hypersensitive to light. They make appropriate soothing noises, then they shine a light into my eye that is so bright that the pain rockets through my head like a knife. ‘Just stay still,’ they say. ‘Don’t blink,’ they say. Don’t blink? It is taking all my willpower and sensory energy not to scream, or pull my head out of the machine. ‘You’re doing fine,’ they say. ‘Now we’ll just do the same with the other eye.’ I wriggle, I squirm, I dig my nails into my hands, I try to focus on my breathing. Then comes the actual eye test. Harmless and painless, but doing it immediately after making me squirm in pain for several minutes means I am not at my best. My heart is racing, my anxiety is through the roof, my eyes struggle to focus. It is usually not until halfway through the test that my stress levels drop enough for me to be able to provide an accurate and audible response to the question: ‘Which is clearer, A or B?’ It is little wonder that nine times out of ten, when we get to the part where they want me to choose a pair of frames from the several hundred on display while they make admiring noises, I have to make an excuse as to why I need to leave and come back another day. Perhaps more concerning, it is not unusual for me to get new glasses and discover that they don’t seem quite right—and on retest (without the preceding ‘examination’), they discover that they need to adjust the prescription. How could they make it easier? Believe me, I have thought a lot about this question. They could do some autism awareness training and understand that it is more than ‘a little bit uncomfortable’. They could do the vision test first so that I can see and speak, and then do the excruciating parts. They could do one eye and then allow me a few minutes to de-stress and recalibrate before they do the other. They could preselect a limited range of frames for me to choose from (particularly since experience shows that each year I choose a pair that is the closest possible match to the ones I already have). DON’T FORGET THAT WE USE MORE THAN ONE SENSE AT A TIME Like many autistic people, I find that the energy requirements for processing multiple sensory inputs are cumulative. They are perhaps better described as exponentially rather than additively cumulative. So if I am in a room where the lights are really bright, I will struggle to follow the conversation. If I am looking at your eyes (or your face on a computer screen), I find it hard to process what you are saying. If the tag on my shirt is sticking into my skin, I find the bright lights even more overwhelming. That is why it is so important, if you are supporting an autistic person (or you are an autistic person who is advocating for a comfortable environment), to pay attention to all of the potential sensory triggers and to really understand which ones are particularly problematic for that person. Sensory hypersensitivity can have a major impact across many areas of an autistic person’s life. For instance, it can impact on our ability to function and achieve our potential in education and employment. Many of us find that the barriers to studying and working are not our capacity to do the work, but rather the capacity to do the work in an environment that overwhelms our senses.3 For many of us, this becomes a trade-off between our career success and our health and wellbeing. Pre-diagnosis (when I believed that everyone experienced the world the way I did), I saw my struggles as a sign of weakness: everyone else could cope with things and I just needed to try harder. I accepted the permanent anxiety, headaches, and exhaustion as a necessary and unavoidable by-product of being in the workplace. I accepted the struggle to focus on conversations and to hear and process the important information despite the constant barrages of sensory information as just part of the job. When I came home at the end of each day desperately wanting to crawl into bed in a dark and quiet room, I forced myself to keep functioning, reasoning that ‘Everyone else can do this’ so my exhaustion must just be a sign of weakness. Post-diagnosis, following many informative sessions with my psychologist, reading lots of books, and watching lots of videos, I came to realise that many of my colleagues experienced the world completely differently from the way I experienced it. They liked the lights, the sounds, the smells, the constant flow of sensory information; and they had the capacity to ‘filter out’ anything that distracted them from their primary purpose. With my psychologist’s help, I started to work through a process of identifying the things in my work environment that were negatively impacting on me. To a non-autistic person, that may sound strange—how can you not know the things that cause you pain?—but when you live in a world full of overwhelming sensory input it is difficult to isolate what the problems (and solutions) are. Sometimes it was as simple as working out why I felt comfortable in one work environment but not in another, and how I could replicate the things that made the former less stressful than the latter. As I have grown in to my autism, learning more about autism and more about me, I have come to realise just how much of an impact my sensory challenges have had on my life. The cumulative impact of constant self-doubt and anxiety, combined with the physical and emotional scars from forcing myself to ‘cope’ in a world that isn’t built for people like me, has taken a considerable toll on my health and wellbeing. Looking back, knowing what I know now about my diagnosis and the long-term effects of suppressing my feelings and needs, I wish I had been more willing to listen to my body and less focused on appearing ‘normal’ and overcoming my ‘weaknesses’. I am really fortunate to work in the role that I do, with a boss who supports me, a team who accept my quirks, and an organisation that is willing to make environmental adjustments to my workspace to reduce my stress levels and help me function. However, it took a long time to get to this space, and it has only come after a series of workplaces and work cultures that made me feel exhausted, inadequate, and desperately unhappy. It is hard to explain the cumulative damage of decades of being forced to cope with painful levels of sensory input because objectively (for non-autistic people) the lights are not too bright, the sound is not too loud, the smell is hardly detectable ... Having the support and understanding of your supervisors, colleagues, and staff is vital for making the workplace inclusive. When we moved to the building we are currently working in, I asked for the lights above my desk to be disconnected (they were too bright) and the air-conditioning vent over my desk to be blocked (the feeling of cold air blowing on me was really distracting and uncomfortable). I brought in some of my favourite things from home, including plushies, Ooshies and blocks for the tactile sensations; dolls to make me smile; and pink desk accessories because pink is my happy colour. My office probably doesn’t look like a university executive’s office, but it is a place in which I feel calm and productive. My boss understands that I need to say no to some meetings and events when I already have a packed day, to have dimmer switches in my office, and to have days when I can work from home. My staff are completely accepting of my need to wear sunglasses in meetings, to turn the sound down on videos, and to often walk around the office barefoot. I have many lovely colleagues who consciously alter the environment to make me feel comfortable. I remember my first meeting with a very senior university executive in his Melbourne office; as I was ushered in by his assistant, he reached up and turned the fluorescent lights off, and we had a very productive meeting. The only downside of having such lovely colleagues is that sometimes it comes as a shock when I am interacting with someone from outside my team and I realise how far the world still has to go with autism awareness (and acceptance) in the workplace and beyond. I have been in many meetings— even some with people from organisations that represent autistic people—where I have been forced to endure extreme levels of sensory discomfort because ‘It’s not that bad’ or ‘It will only be a short meeting’. I cannot overemphasise the value of having a ‘safe space’ to retreat to, somewhere you can shut out all the unpleasant and painful sensory stimuli and surround yourself with calming sensory input. Exactly what that space looks like for each autistic person will differ—just as our sensory triggers differ—but we all need it. For me, it is my bedroom and, more specifically, my bed. Everything is pink (my happy colour), the lights are dim, it is quiet, I have my weighted blanket, I have my squishies and my super-soft unicorn—all of this in a bed shaped like a house, which my older son’s partner made wraparound curtains for. For my younger son, it is a sofa in the spare room with lots of sunlight, his blankets, the cat, and funny videos on his laptop. For my older son, it is his recliner chair, his noise-cancelling headphones, and a history book. Every autistic person needs a space like that in their home—somewhere they can retreat, relax, and recover from the constant input of a world that is too bright, too loud, too smelly, too prickly, and too confusing. Notes Measurement of eye pressure (tonometry) is an essential screening test for glaucoma. An ophthalmoscope (bright light) enables the optometrist to examine the back of your eyes for signs of damage. There are also the social challenges, and the barriers caused by a lack of autism awareness and acceptance, but those are addressed in Part 3. Bad Habits: To Stim or Not to Stim? My husband worries about me when I go out walking by myself, especially when I am walking in the city. He is not worried about kidnappers, terrorists, natural disasters or any of the things that other husbands probably worry about. He is worried that I will trip over a paving stone, bang into another pedestrian or collide with a building. To be clear, my husband does not suffer from a bizarre paranoia. He suffers from reality. He worries that these things will happen because, to be honest, they do. These mishaps—walking into people, buildings, poles, street signs, trees—tend to happen to me on a regular basis. Every morning as I walk to the office through the crowded streets I stare intently at my phone, answering emails or tapping away on random keys. When I am with my husband or one of our sons, they gently steer me through the oncoming people, grasping my hand tightly as we near intersections. For a long time I assumed I stared at my phone because, like many in this century, I can’t bear to be disconnected.1 The light-bulb moment came when I realised that on the rare occasions I don’t have my phone with me, I pick at my fingernails or at loose threads on my clothes instead. Bing! I don’t bump into people because of my phone: I look at my phone because of the people. There are few things more intimidating to an introverted autistic like myself than crowds of people talking, moving, rushing, smoking. The sensory load of all those sights and smells and sounds is overwhelming. I look at my phone because it gives me a socially legitimate reason to fidget (or to ‘stim’, as most autistics refer to such behaviour), which helps me to cope with the sensory overload and arrive at work not completely exhausted. So, I tried an experiment. One day I put my phone in my backpack and loaded my pockets with a collection of tiny things I like to stim with: an Ooshie in each pocket, a piece of string in the left, a flexible metal puzzle in the right. I walked to work happily fiddling with those objects, not even thinking about my phone, and actually (mostly) looking where I was going. I would like to say I am now a certified-safe pedestrian, but that is not strictly true as I still find it a lot easier to walk if I am looking at my feet than if I am looking at the faces coming towards me—but my pocket friends keep me from stepping into traffic and help me venture calmly through the crowds. Self-stimulatory behaviours (aka ‘stimming’) are coping strategies that many autistic people use to help them deal with anxiety, frustration, sensory overload, boredom, and a range of other negative emotions and sensations. I had seen the more externally evident examples of stimming (flapping hands, rocking, spinning, banging) in autistic children—including my own children—and understood their function, but had not connected them to my own behaviour. I learnt at a very early age that some of the things I naturally do to make myself feel comfortable can make other people feel uncomfortable. This might be because the things are irritating, but often it is because they are not considered ‘normal’ behaviours. As a child, when I was focusing intently on something I made little noises. I can’t really describe them, because I was making them, not hearing them, but I think they were like little ‘ums’ or expirations of air. I wasn’t really conscious that I was doing this, but my parents certainly were. I would be sitting there reading or thinking or working on something and someone would say, ‘You are making those noises again.’ I would try to continue what I was doing without making noises, but this meant that 95 per cent of my brain was focused on not making noises and only 5 per cent was left for the activity. I did eventually stop making the noises (well, at least I think I did), but it took a long time of living with a heightened sense of anxiety. A number of my other behaviours were less invasive but still considered not normal. To this day, when I am feeling stressed or anxious I like to count or label things. I remember that when I was a child we had an intricate pattern on the floor tiles in our bathroom. To me, the shapes were little creatures in my safe made-up world. I could count them, I could name them all, I could reassure myself with the fact that they were all in the right place. To my family on the other side of the bathroom door, they were tiles. I would sit in there and before too long someone would say, ‘Who are you talking to?’ or ‘How long are you going to be in there?’ I don’t think I ever told anyone who I was talking to; I just learnt that I needed to be more discreet. I remember the sheets my mum bought that had a sort of paisley pattern on them. What a delight! Each little swirl could be counted and named and grouped by size and orientation, and—best of all—it was my secret. We had three sets: a blue set, a lilac set and a yellow set, and I can still remember them clearly. Lilac was my favourite, but even with the yellow ones (and I hate the colour yellow) my safe and ordered miniature world was there. Then finally there were those behaviours that were considered ‘normal’ (in the sense that all children engage in them at some point) but ‘inappropriate’ (in the sense that they don’t meet the standard of good manners)—like picking at my skin, biting my nails, or twirling my hair. I am not sure why these things annoy people, but they do. It is important to note that throughout my childhood I had no idea that I was autistic: I just thought I was weird or faulty. Equally, my parents had no idea I was autistic, and given the understanding of autism at the time, it is highly unlikely that if they had suspected it they would have found it easy to get a diagnosis. They did what most parents do—tried to make sure that I appeared ‘normal’ and well-adjusted. I suspect that some of these lessons did make my life easier. As an adult I realise how annoying the noises I made must have been for the people around me, and it is probably a good thing that I was conditioned not to make them as it may well have saved the sanity of people I have shared offices with as an adult. I don’t think my parents had any sense that extinguishing (or teaching me to hide) my quirks was having a negative impact on my mental health and my sense of identity. For me as an (undiagnosed) autistic person, hiding these behaviours became part of the mask I wore in public to appear as a capable, functioning, ‘normal’ person but the inherent need to do them didn’t go away: I just found ways to hide or suppress them, and internalised the message that these behaviours were bad and I had to make sure people didn’t see that I was faulty. Instead of counting or categorising things out loud, I learnt to do this in my head. I would count the syllables in sentences, repeating them over and over in my head, reassured by the fact that the number came out the same every time. I would (and still do) have a set of stock phrases and mini-conversations that I repeated over and over in my head when I was feeling stressed or anxious. When I am having a really bad day—or am walking laps of the kitchen de-stressing after a tough day at work—it is not unusual for me to mutter to myself over and over, ‘Have you met my husband?’ I don’t know why I say that, especially since the only person in the room is me (and I have definitely met him), but somehow it helps lower my anxiety level and after several minutes I can settle in with a cup of tea.2 Instead of rocking or flapping or banging, I would play counting games on my fingers, counting out words or sets of numbers in different combinations over and over again, making sure the movements weren’t observable to other people. As I got older, I also discovered some socially acceptable hobbies that address the need for the soothing feeling that comes with repetitive behaviours. Knitting was a lifesaver! It is the ultimate in repetitive behaviours, packaged in a form that is both socially acceptable and productive—so productive, in fact, that my cupboards are full of knitted blankets, cardigans, scarves, baby clothes (even though I haven’t had a baby in the house for more than two decades) and doll’s clothes. Unfortunately, sewing up knitted garments doesn’t have the same calming effect on me, so I also have a huge collection of knitted items waiting to be constructed. It is not just that I like knitting: I need to knit. At the end of a stressful workday, a couple of hours of knitting helps me relax to the point that I can calm the thoughts racing around in my head. If I can’t knit for some reason, my level of anxiety continues to increase. I travel a lot for work and always take some knitting with me because it is the only way I can re-centre myself. I have even discovered some handy little tricks such as children’s safety scissors—they are plenty sharp enough to cut yarn, and are allowed in your airport carry-on luggage. I learnt to hide the ‘inappropriate’ behaviours by forcing myself to control the urge to do them until I was alone in my room. I also learnt the hard way which ones were the most difficult to hide. Repeatedly brushing and curling your hair in the dark in your bedroom is all very well until the brush gets tangled in your hair, you panic and try to get it out and make more of a mess, and finally you have to find a parent who can cut it out for you. Picking at your fingernails in the dark is fine, but eventually people notice that your nails are a mess, so you realise that toenails are a better option. I still do this when I am stressed, and I permanently have very short (and often bleeding) toenails that hurt when I walk. On days when I am really anxious and I have socks and shoes on, the urge to pick at my fingernails is overwhelming and it is not unusual for me to leave a meeting with a pocket full of shredded nails. With my increasing understanding of autism came the realisation that these ‘weird’ things were not dysfunctional behaviours to be eradicated, but rather functional behaviours that helped me to deal with sensory overload and stress. I also discovered that my husband had made this connection long before I did. Apparently I had not hidden my stimming as well as I thought I had, and my husband and sons were aware of a number of my stims and the function they served. I suspect that this is because I am more relaxed around them than I am around anyone else, and more comfortable being myself, so I let my mask fall off when I am at home. This is one of the things that we need to understand as autistic people, and that neurotypicals need to understand about us as autistic people. Stimming helps us regulate our sensory input and gives us back a tiny bit of control over the unpredictable external environment. We stim to express our emotions (like when we are happy or excited) and to cope with our emotions (like when we are sad or anxious). The other really important function stimming serves by regulating our sensory input is that it makes it easier for us to focus on what we need to. This seems counterintuitive to neurotypical people, particularly those in authority (such as parents, teachers and bosses). If I am doodling on my notepad or spinning my fidget spinner while someone is talking to me, it doesn’t mean I am not paying attention; in fact, it means I am using my stimming behaviour to reduce the sensory overload from the lights, the smells, the background noise, the tag in my shirt so that I can focus my sensory energy on listening to what they are saying. As I began to really understand the importance of stimming to my emotional and physical wellbeing, I started to let my body react in a way that felt natural and not to constantly stifle my impulses (at least not at home). So now, when I am feeling anxious or agitated, I fidget, I rock back and forth, I tap my feet, I play with a Squishimal! Throughout the day I sing more, I dance more, I repeat random phrases, I rock in my rocking chair, I tap out tunes on my legs. I flap my hands around when I am excited, I curl up with my rug and my super-soft hippo when I am feeling stressed. The more I ‘grow in to’ my autism and let myself behave naturally, the happier and calmer I am. I still make those funny noises but I don’t know whether that means I have started doing them again because I feel more comfortable, or I never stopped doing them but just thought I did. I became aware of this recently when my husband commented on it. No, he didn’t say, ‘Stop making that noise’; he said, ‘I like it when you make those noises. That’s how I know you are happy, like a cat purring.’ I still hide most of these behaviours when I am at work or out shopping, because society has a long way to go before autistic people can be themselves without judgement and stigma. But I know that when I get home, I can relax and recharge. Depending on where you work, it can be very difficult to find socially acceptable ways of stimming —but at the same time it is horrendously emotionally draining if you have to force your body to stay still. For those of us who have a space to escape to (a quiet room or an office with a door), this can mean bottling up all that nervous energy until we can escape to our quiet space. For those who work in an open-plan office or a store or a public place, it can mean bottling it up until we get home and can • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • explode. Neither of these options is healthy, and the energy it can take to control those behaviours often means you don’t have enough left to focus on what you are supposed to be doing or on the person you are talking to. One of the initiatives I am most proud of at our university is a sensory room we have set up for our autistic students—it has low lights, comfy chairs, and a cupboard with an array of fidget toys and activities. My favourite season is winter—for a whole range of reasons, including pockets! In winter we tend to wear coats or bulkier jackets. If you were to look in the pockets of my coat you would find an Ooshie (or two), an empty tablet foil that has a smooth bubble on one side and a sharp edge on the other, a small spinner, and a random collection of clips. Having such a treasure trove of coping mechanisms is much harder to achieve in summer. The only time this habit has ever caused me any angst was the day I attended a team workshop and the trainer thought it was a good idea to ask us all to empty out our pockets. The point she was trying to make was how much technology has taken over our lives—we all carry a phone, a credit card (instead of cash), a swipe card to access our office building (instead of a key), and so on. She looked quite confused when she saw the little pile of objects on the table in front of my seat. Most autistic adults will have developed ‘invisible stims’ (such as clenching and unclenching their toes) or semi-visible stims (such as subtly moving side-to-side in their chair) to help them get through the day. Another trick I have found is to have a collection of items that even the most neurotypical person can’t help fiddling with. People looked at me strangely when I first brought a pile of magnetic shapes into the office to fiddle with during meetings, but before long I found that I was not the only one building symmetrical objects with them to help me focus on the conversation. Here are some subtle stims (that is, you can probably get away with doing them in the office) that I use and/or have come across from talking to other autistic people: clench your toes rub your hands together rub your feet together pick at your skin fiddle with your hair pick at your nails fiddle with the edge of a book play an imaginary piano bounce your legs/feet fold and/or tear small pieces of paper twist the cuffs/hems of your clothes line things up in your head clench and unclench your fists doodle pull a cap on and off something in your pocket fiddle with jewellery hold your breath check your phone (very subtly) chew gum. And here are some that are better if you have an office or a quiet space: rub soft fabric dance • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • sing make noises repeat phrases spin around in your chair crumple paper play with a fidget spinner or soft toy listen to a song over and over watch bubbles/an hourglass/a slow-moving object chew on your clothes scratch your scalp curl up under a weighted blanket braid and unbraid your hair sway back and forth (or side-to-side). And, finally, some very productive ones: weed the garden knit do a jigsaw puzzle play piano alphabetise books/records/anything neatly stack shelves. Notes When I originally wrote this, it was ‘We all assumed ...’, not ‘I assumed …’—but my older son informs me that the rest of the family did not make that faulty assumption. One of the great things about the internet is the existence of online groups of autistic people. I love that reassuring feeling when someone posts a ‘Do you ...?’ and more than 600 people respond almost immediately with ‘Yes’ and describe a similar experience. Many of the phrases people repeat seem to be as random as mine—for example, ‘Mind the gap’, ‘Don’t like, don’t want’ and ‘I like cheese’. I Just Need One More: Hobbies, Interests, and Obsessions When I was a child, I collected stamps. What did I like about stamps? They could be sorted and categorised by country and then for each country they could be sorted and categorised by year of issue. They (usually) came in sets—a series of images on a theme, each with a different monetary value. Complete sets could be carefully placed in albums, from lowest face value to highest face value. Incomplete sets could be completed by buying more stamps or swapping stamps with other collectors (not that I was a big fan of the latter). I also collected books. I still collect books. They are better than stamps because they have a dual purpose. Books, like stamps, can be sorted and categorised: by genre, by author, by year of publication. Also like stamps, they often come in sets—not concurrently issued, like stamps, but typically consecutively issued with a predetermined order that they should be displayed in (and read in). Books also contain knowledge and ideas and imagery and adventure. I am an avid reader and have never understood the attraction of e-readers. I like the weight of a book in my hand when I read, the feel of the pages when I turn them, and the satisfaction of looking at the books neatly lined up post-read in the correct order. My heart still sings every time I look at my complete set of Agatha Christie novels, and I still search every bookshop for the missing volumes in my PG Wodehouse collection. Stamp collecting was a socially acceptable hobby for a child; in my generation, back when everyone wrote letters, everyone collected stamps. It is still an acceptable, although less common hobby for an adult. Reading books was not only (both then and now) socially acceptable, but also socially desirable: a child (or adult) who reads lots of books is seen as quiet, intelligent, and self-sufficient. When I was a child I was also very interested in snails. I liked their methodical movement and predictable behaviour, and the fact that every snail had a slightly different pattern on its shell. I did try to collect snails. I researched, and I planned, and I designed an appropriate home—a series of interconnected chocolate-milk cartons stocked with fresh grass, and water dishes. However, snail collecting was not a socially acceptable hobby for a child, especially a child who shared a bedroom with a sister who was not enamoured with snails. It is very common for autistic people to have strong and persistent (often quite narrow) interests. Psychiatrists describe this as ‘Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g., strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively circumscribed or perseverative interests)’ (DSM-5). Many parents and health professionals describe these interests as ‘obsessions’, but autistic people typically describe them as Special Interests, or SPINs. Hobby: a pursuit outside one’s regular occupation engaged in especially for relaxation. ‘Her hobbies are reading and gardening’ Interest: a feeling that accompanies or causes special attention to something or someone. ‘Their sole interests are soccer, drink and cars’ Obsession: a persistent disturbing preoccupation with an often unreasonable idea or feeling. ‘He was in the grip of an obsession he was powerless to resist’ – Merriam-Webster Dictionary1 One of the best definitions of ‘obsession’ I have come across is in the Collins English Dictionary:2 NOUN: a persistent idea or impulse that continually forces its way into consciousness, often associated with anxiety and mental illness VARIABLE NOUN: If you say that someone has an obsession with a person or thing, you think they are spending too much time thinking about them. I am not suggesting that obsessions that are fundamentally harmful to an individual should be left unchecked—for example, if a person is obsessed with fire or knives to the extent that it is all they can think about or that they harm themselves or others in pursuit of their interest. What I am suggesting is that before you decide that your (or your loved one’s) SPIN is a harmful obsession, ask three questions. One, does this interest prevent you/them from participating in life (impacts on eating, hygiene or wellbeing)? Two, is the interest potentially physically or psychologically harmful? Three, would the person wanting you/them to curtail this interest feel the same way if it was something they themselves were interested in? My publicly visible special interest is my research. For many years I worked in the area of alcohol marketing and its impact on children and adolescents. I read every article I could find, subscribed to journals and read every issue, subscribed to trade press, went to conferences, collected books and read them cover to cover. In the decade 2009–18, on the topic of alcohol marketing I published sixty-two refereed journal articles, five commentaries, and three book chapters; gave over eighty public presentations; and won more than $3.5 million in competitive research funding. I also conducted research in the area of social marketing, particularly cancer screening and prevention, with a similar result in terms of publications and funding. By most definitions, my research is a ‘productive’ special interest, one that people respect and value and thus is unlikely to be dismissed as an obsession. This is one of the great strengths of many autistic people: our thirst for knowledge and our ability to focus deeply on a topic of interest make us great students, researchers and employees. Like many autistic academics, my biggest research SPIN is autism—specifically, research into the lived experiences of autistic people. For many years I resisted the very strong pull to this area of research, reasoning that as the parent of two autistic children I was ‘too close’ to the topic, and potential bias might reduce the quality of my work. However, the more ‘autism research’ I read, the more frustrated I became with the absence of autistic voices; and I came to realise that my being autistic was a strength rather than a limitation as a researcher. I am now a very active ‘autistic researcher researching autism’ and very much enjoy working with other autistic researchers who share my academic SPIN. My ultimate dream is to have a dedicated autism research centre that is staffed by autistic researchers, doing work that fundamentally changes the landscape of inclusion for autistic people. I just need to win the lottery! Most people who know me professionally know about this SPIN of mine, but very few know that I have a number of concurrent interests that are not seen as ‘normal’ for a learned professor in her fifties. I love to knit (see Chapter 8) but I also love to collect yarn. Yarn is soft, it is pretty, and it can be sorted and categorised into different colours, different plies, different compositions. I can’t go past a craft shop without stopping for a ‘quick’ look and leaving with an armful of yarn. My husband knows that if I am having a bad day, nothing cheers me up like him saying ‘Would you like to go to Spotlight? Or Lincraft? Or both?’ I have hundreds upon hundreds of balls of knitting yarn. If I started on my first box of yarn this afternoon and kept knitting continuously, I might get through it all by the time I am 207, assuming I don’t need to eat, sleep or work. I know I will never use all the yarn I own, but just having it and looking at it brings me great joy. My greatest passion is dolls. For many years I looked wistfully at dolls in toy stores, imagining the hundreds I would buy for my children. But I had two boys who had no interest in dolls, so then I imagined the dolls I would buy for my grandchildren (no pressure, kids!). Then one day my husband asked, ‘Why do you need to wait for an excuse? If you like dolls so much, you should buy them for yourself.’ I bought a doll, then another, and another—and now I have hundreds. Some people think I have too many and that they take up too much space. At one point I asked my husband for advice. Me: Do you think I have too many dolls? Husband: No. Me: Are you sure? Husband: I will tell you when you have too many. Me: How will you know? Husband: When the postman delivers a parcel and you don’t get excited. My collection has probably doubled since that day and, yes, I still get excited every time I hear the postman. What’s so good about dolls? The most obvious thing is that they are attractive and they make me feel happy. Nothing beats waking up in the morning to a row of smiling faces or coming home from a hard day at work to a sea of pretty creatures in pink dresses (pink being the primary colour in my world). Like stamps and books, dolls can be categorised, sorted and organised (by era, style, designer, size ...). They can also be catalogued, carefully noting down designer, source, purchase date, price, packaging, and so on. Like stamps and books, they come in sets, giving the joy of hunting down the remaining characters or editions, or the missing shoes or accessories, and the exhilaration of being able to complete a display. But dolls have two additional advantages over stamps and books: first, you can knit for them; and second, you can pose them and photograph them, creating fantasy worlds and recreating lived experiences with better endings. Now, some people would argue that my non-work SPINs (knitting, reading fiction books, collecting dolls) are not productive or, worse, interfere with my productivity in other areas. I believe the opposite is true: the ability to bury myself in these passions gives me the energy and focus to be able to achieve in my work-related areas of interest. For autistic people our special interests—or ‘obsessions’ to the ill-informed—serve a number of really important functions. Our SPINs are not that different to neurotypical ‘hobbies’ in the functions they serve—we just engage with them a lot more deeply and, I believe, find them to be more fundamental to our wellbeing and happiness. These intense interests can also give us a way to start conversations and a safe space to retreat to when we don’t know how to structure or continue a social interaction. We can join clubs or online groups with people who share our interests, feeling a sense of value and belonging to a community. Our SPINs can also give us a way to start conversations with people who don’t share our interests, if they take the time to understand how much they mean to us. My husband and both of my sons are regularly consulted on which outfit looks better on a particular doll, which dolls should be displayed in which cabinets, and other things on which those who do not love dolls are not usually expected to have opinions. My younger son often talks to the rest of us about his SPIN—his grandmother probably knows more about Transformers than all of the other people in her retirement village put together. I find overlaps between aspects of my love of dolls and my son’s love of Transformers; for example, we bond over the decline in the quality of new issues of our respective collections (cheaper materials, less articulation). The world is a crazy, busy, noisy, unpredictable place, full of social rules and norms that autistic people don’t fully understand. For many, the world outside our front door is also an environment in which we have to hide a lot of who we are in our pursuit to fit in and be accepted. Engaging with our SPINs provides a way to relax and de-stress, to fully immerse our mind in something we know and love. Our SPINs can give us a sense of structure and order, where everything has its rightful place and we have the joyous experience of knowing what is correct and what is not. Oftentimes this is the only space in which we feel we have total control over our lives. Notes Definitions from https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary. See https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/obsession. I Always Do It This Way: Habits and Routines My typical workday is packed with social interactions, complex problems, unexpected events, and decisions to be made. The best thing about lunchtime, and the reason I look forward to it from the moment I enter the office in the morning, is that it is safe and predictable. There are no major decisions to be made, and no risk of making a wrong decision and being surprised by the outcome. When our office was in the CBD, there was a shop around the corner with really nice salads that met all of my dietary needs (see Chapter 5). It had three salads I liked, and if one wasn’t available, the other two were. Lunch was the highlight of my day. Safe. Predictable. On those terrible—but thankfully rare—days when I got stuck in a meeting and by the time I got to the shop all three salads had sold out, I went hungry. Then we moved to a new office building in East Melbourne. One of my biggest concerns was ‘What will I have for lunch?’ I checked out all the local eateries but none had anything that looked like my salads, so for the first month in the new office, each day I walked back to the salad shop and carried my lunch back to the office (a good twenty minutes each way). Until one day I broke my toe, and the walk was out of the question. Bravely, I ventured into the cafe next door to our office building. Thankfully, by this stage it was winter and they had switched to a new menu. I was delighted when I saw chicken and corn soup. I checked the ingredient list and nothing rang alarm bells, so I ordered: ‘Chicken and corn soup, please, with gluten-free toast and no butter.’ It was delicious. For the next three months, lunch was once again my ‘happy space’. Safe. Predictable. Then came the fateful day when I entered the cafe at my usual lunchtime, walked to the counter and said, ‘Chicken and corn soup, please, with gluten-free toast and no butter’, only to be told that there was no soup. It was spring and soup was off the menu until next winter. No lunch for me that day. Luckily, my toe was completely healed and the next day I could walk to the salad shop! One of the things that I have learnt from following autism groups on social media is that many of my routines and rituals are common among autistic people and uncommon among neurotypical people. Some of my routines I thought were unique to me—and indicative of my weirdness or brokenness —so it has been reassuring to discover that other people share them. Conversely, some of my routines are things I thought everyone did and have been surprised to discover that they are not standard human behaviour. When I eat anything, whether a three-course meal or a handful of peanuts, I chew the food evenly on both sides of my mouth. The first piece I chew on the left, the second I chew on the right, then I repeat this until it’s all eaten. I need to do this, in the way that I need to breathe out if I breathe in. Each piece needs to be the same food and the same size. When I am preparing a snack, I automatically serve an even number of pieces. If there are twenty-five crackers in the box, I will put twenty-four on my plate and one in the bin. When I am eating a meal, I ensure that I select (or cut) pieces so that there is always an even number of bites of each food—for example, six pieces of carrot and eight pieces of potato. This is not a habit that causes me any social embarrassment, which is probably why I was fifty before I realised it wasn’t a universal need. At times it is a habit that can make me seem generous: if I am eating a bar of chocolate and there are three pieces, I will eat two and give the third to my husband. At other times it is a habit that can make me seem selfish: if there are only two pieces, I need to eat them both and hope my husband isn’t looking. The only time this habit has ever caused me a problem is when I had dental surgery. The dentist instructed me on taking care of the area, including ‘Don’t chew on the left side of your mouth for a day or two’. To him, that was a simple request, but for me, it meant almost two days without food. I was hungry but physically could not bring myself to eat anything knowing that I could only chew on one side of my mouth. One day I was scrolling through the posts in an autism group and someone commented that they could only eat food that had an even number of pieces. Several people responded with ‘Me too’ or with other examples of their eating routines. I did a quick poll of my family and a few friends (just the ones who are used to me asking random questions) and most of them looked at me as though I was asking if they had three arms, or they asked me to explain the question. Apparently, most people just eat what is there and don’t even think about what side of their mouth it will be on. Weird, huh? I am not suggesting that all (or even many) autistic people share this ritual of mine. Both of my sons are autistic and both were equally bemused by my question. But the joy of interacting with other autistic people is that they immediately understand why I need to follow such a ritual and how distressing it is if I can’t. My food routines—or ‘safe foods’, as I have seen them referred to on autism pages—give my life a sense of predictability and make me feel in control, which is very important in a world where I seem to have so little control. In the morning I have breakfast cereal with milk, and a cup of English Breakfast tea. For a very long time I ate ‘Kind Granola’, a cereal made in the United States that met all my dietary needs—both medical and sensory—and that I could buy online from Australia. I was even adventurous enough to rotate between three different flavours. The postage cost more than the cereal, but it was worth it because I knew it would always taste exactly the same. Then they stopped exporting to Australia! Fortunately, around the same time our local supermarket increased its range of gluten-free foods. Now I eat a fifty-fifty mix of Freedom Foods cereal (one box of crunchy clusters mixed with one box of plain cereal). The more other areas of my life become unpredictable, the more my routines become essential and keep me from feeling like the world is spinning out of control. When I travel for work, the first thing I do after I check into the hotel is go to the nearest supermarket and buy a box of ‘my’ cereal and a carton of ‘my’ milk. I avoid the unpredictable (and noisy) hotel restaurant by ordering the same meal every night using a food delivery app. Apparently, most people take the opportunity to try new dining experiences when they travel for work; I know this because our finance officer commented that she could do my travel reimbursements before I even leave as she knows exactly what will be on the receipts. During the COVID-19 lockdown, when the world was going crazy, I ate the same meal for dinner day in, day out; you may not be surprised to know that it was ready-to-serve chicken and corn soup. My daily routines help me cope with the stress of work. I wake up at the same time each workday morning. I have a shower (with the same soap I have always used); on Mondays and Thursdays I wash my hair. I get dressed in everything except my most outer garment—for example, dress or shirt —and put on my robe.1 I eat my (same) breakfast and drink my (same) tea. I brush my teeth, and then I finish dressing. I check my emails to make sure there are no surprises waiting for me at work. When it is time to go, I walk the same way to work, always crossing the same intersections in the same order (even if it means I have to wait at the corner because the wrong traffic light is green). No, I do not have obsessive-compulsive disorder (although OCD is more common among autistic people). I am happy to drink my tea from a different teacup (as long as it isn’t too small), my cupboards are not organised, my home is not neat and tidy. I just like things to be predictable. I like to know what will happen. I think this is one of the reasons I like jigsaw puzzles (all the pieces will fit to make the picture on the box) and fictional crime shows (the detective will solve the case). I de-stress at the end of my workday by watching television—not informative, educational documentaries (which you might expect of an academic) but what some people would call ‘junk TV’. If I am with my husband, we watch fictional crime shows, dramas or comedies (Line of Duty, Blue Bloods, The Good Fight). I never watch true crime shows—if the bad things actually happened in real life, it makes me think how scary the real world is, and I can’t see how it is entertaining to watch. If I am with my younger son, we watch old TV series (Murder She Wrote, Monk). If I am by myself, I watch girly/teen shows and hospital dramas (Gilmore Girls, Nashville, Code Black). In all cases, I/we ‘binge-watch’ one show from first to last episode over a period of weeks, either on DVDs or on a streaming service. I need to watch two episodes at the end of each day before I can go to bed. I can watch more than two, but I cannot watch less than two. This is the amount I ‘need’ to clear my head from the workday and be relaxed enough to go to sleep. Most days this is not a problem and I plod along with my routine, but sometimes it means I get to bed quite late. For example, if I have an evening meeting or a work event and I don’t get home until 9 p.m., I still need to watch two episodes of my current TV show. The problem comes when something prevents me following my routine. In the morning this is most likely to be an early meeting or—the most dreaded of all—a ‘breakfast meeting’. Suddenly there are so many unknowns (How do I find the right room? What will they feed us?), so many decisions (I haven’t eaten, so do I still brush my teeth before I go? What can I wear that it won’t be obvious if I spill food on it?), and so many illogical changes to my plan (I have to leave the house without drinking my tea! I don’t have time to scan my emails before I leave). In the evening it might be a power blackout, an internet disruption, a long phone call from a family member, or house guests (not that we have a lot of those). Instead of all the agitation I have built up during the day seeping out quietly while I sit in front of the TV, it stays and grows, and I wake up the next morning feeling exhausted and irritable. There are elements of routine in many of my activities, and the more unpredictable or anxiety-inducing the activity, the more essential the routine. When I am unpacking my trolley at the supermarket2 checkout, things must be scanned in a certain order: frozen foods, then refrigerated foods, then cans and bottles, boxes (for example, cereal and tissues), sachets/packets (for example, biscuits and noodles), fruit and vegetables, bread and bakery products. I get agitated if my husband helps me unload the trolley, because he puts things on the checkout in the wrong order. If he does start unloading, I look at the magazines on the impulse rack so I don’t have to see the groceries going out of control. My older son shops like me, so we can sail through the checkout process with both of us knowing what the ‘right’ order is for the items. My younger son, on the other hand, has a totally different approach. As far as I can tell, the logic is that the more he likes an item, the earlier in the process it gets scanned (so all his favourite foods go first). However, given that he shares my hypersensitivity to lights and sounds (and people), he often finds shopping overwhelming and has to leave the store partway through the process. So, when we shop as a family, typically my younger son and I wait in the car. My husband finds shopping for us very easy as he knows that we will want exactly the same items every time. When I go grocery shopping by myself—which I avoid unless absolutely necessary—I start at the top of aisle 1 and progress through each aisle in numerical order. I try to always shop in the same store so that each aisle is where it is meant to be, and get very agitated if they have moved things around. When I’m with my husband I can shop like a butterfly, darting off to look at what is in the stationery aisle or looking at the specials, knowing that I can retreat to the safe space two steps behind him once I have found what I am seeking. One of the great things about my husband is that he is tall, so he is easy to find. Sometimes my need for routine and predictability clashes with other people’s need for spontaneity. If my husband says on Tuesday, ‘Let’s go to the market on Sunday at nine o’clock’, on Sunday morning I will be ready at 9 a.m. I will be dressed, my bag will be packed, and I will be waiting. At 9.05 I will start feeling agitated, by 9.10 I will be stressed, and by 9.15 I will be wound • • • • • • • • • • up like a spring. When he appears at 9.30 a.m. with a cheery smile and says, ‘Are you ready?’, I will explode. Conversely, when we are having a relaxing day at home and he says, ‘Let’s take a drive to the shops and look at shoes’, he will be met by a resounding chorus of ‘No, thank you’ from me and our younger son (and our older son before he moved out of home). It is not that we don’t want to look at shoes: if he said ‘Let’s go look at chocolate’, we would still say no. We had not planned to go out, we did not expect to go out. This is a sudden change to our day. Often what will happen is that we autistic family members will think about the suggestion for a while, discuss it, and then possibly decide we would like to go. We just need time to adjust our plan from ‘doing this’ to ‘doing that’. One of the things I like about the kind of work I do is that much of it is predictable (or at least foreseeable). However, one of the things I struggle with is that some of it is not, especially the parts that have people in them. My need for routines, rituals and doing things the ‘right’ way is partly why I am great at my job, but at the same time it can make me difficult to work with.3 Academia—and particularly research—has lots of (comforting) rules and rituals: It has a clear organisational structure and hierarchy. People have position titles and forms of address (a person with a PhD is always ‘Doctor’). Reports and journal articles are written in the IMRaD structure (Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion). Grant applications have required formats and inclusions. Classes have course outlines, and assignments have assessment grids. Plagiarism is wrong. I like those rules and rituals. I can follow those rules and rituals. I get confused, stressed and agitated when other people don’t follow them. When I was at school, the teachers were ‘Mr X’ and ‘Ms Y’. When I started at university, I was completely thrown by the fact that other students called the lecturers and tutors by their first names. I continued to call them ‘Professor Brown’ and ‘Doctor Green’ while everyone else called them ‘Bob’ and ‘Gina’. I thought I was being polite and respectful; other people (apparently) thought I was being unfriendly and aloof. When I was promoted to my current position, I started meeting regularly with our (then) university vice-chancellor. He would say ‘Call me Greg’ and I would shift in my chair. My thought process was that if I called him ‘Vice-Chancellor’ he might think I was being unfriendly, but if I called him ‘Greg’ the sky might fall in—so I would carefully word every sentence of every conversation to ensure that I didn’t need to use his name. Things that can cause significant distress in our family: Changes to labelling or packaging—for example, when the manufacturers of the soup I eat for dinner every night rebranded and changed the colour of the label, even though the ingredients list said the soup was identical. Changes to home decor—for example, when we decided to remove the very old and deteriorated carpet from our floor and polish the underlying floorboards, our older son (then aged seventeen) argued for months that we must not touch the carpet in his room. People moving our things (even slightly)—for example, our younger son has his Transformers in display cabinets and will notice, and become very distressed, if someone moves any of them even a few centimetres from its rightful place. • • Updates to apps or programs—for example, to my husband’s dismay, I try to avoid downloading software updates on my smartphone in case they result in a change to the colour, typeface or order of menu options. Seasonal or special-event changes to logos, icons or theme music—for example, I get very agitated when I go to watch a streaming service and the icon has changed for the Olympics, or I press play on the first episode of the next season of a TV series and they have made changes to the theme song. Changes to household routines—for example, recently my husband suggested that we relocate the rubbish bins from the front yard to the backyard, thus reducing the time and effort required to carry the rubbish from the kitchen to the bin each day and from the bin to the road each week. He explained the logic carefully to our younger son, who listened carefully and then responded with an adamant and very final no! When I was compiling this list I discussed it with my husband and he commented that other (non-autistic) people he has tried to explain this to have trouble understanding how much these changes impact us. He said they often respond with ‘Oh, everyone gets annoyed about that’ or ‘Yes, that bugs me too’ when he tries to explain why his majority-autistic family need our routines and rituals. What is different for autistic people is that for us these are not fleeting irritations that pass by in a few moments. Our routines and rituals provide a sense of order and balance, and even seemingly small changes make our world feel unpredictable and unstable. Notes This saves me having to choose a new set of clothes when I spill my breakfast on my shirt. If you are not sure why grocery shopping is a ‘high-stress’ activity, read Chapter 5. The blessing and curse that is perfectionism needs its own chapter—see Chapter 11. A Millimetre to the Left: Perfectionism, Expectations, and Boundaries It was time to get my new Mental Health Plan. I made an appointment to see my doctor, and after the usual small talk (which is always the hardest part for me), we got down to the business of the plan. This involved a discussion about how I was feeling, followed by the completion of some standard assessments for anxiety and depression. As usual, I scored OK for depression and way too high for anxiety. The doctor wrote a referral to my psychologist, and my husband and I headed out to the car park, him steering me through the people and me reading the referral. Problem/Diagnosis: - Anxiety - Autism Spectrum Disorder - K10 score:1 31 - Predisposing Factors: obsessive, perfectionist, changes at work Me: She has written here that I am a perfectionist. Husband: You didn’t know that about yourself? Me: Well, I guess I knew, but how did she come to that conclusion? Husband: She has met you. As a child, I never really thought of myself as a perfectionist. I knew that I liked to get things right and dreaded getting things wrong, but didn’t everybody? In secondary school each subject had a five-level rating score: the bottom one was ‘Fail’ and the top one was ‘Advanced Credit’. I can’t remember the other three because my own personal grading system had just two ratings: Pass = Advanced Credit; Fail = everything else. I assumed the other students felt the same way, and nearly fell off my chair the first time I heard one of them say, ‘Anything more than 50 per cent is a waste of effort.’ My parents had high expectations of me: I was going to be the first person in our family to go to university and I was going to be a doctor or lawyer. My teachers had high expectations of me: I was going to blaze through the exams and bring great credit to the school. I had much higher expectations of myself, combined with deep-seated doubts about my capacity and a crippling fear of failure. I had no time for distractions such as friends, toys, games or celebrity crushes. This intrinsic drive to succeed, combined with an unwavering commitment to learning, saw me through the first ten years of my education. Then came Year 11—senior high school—and everything changed. If you have read Chapter 1, you will be aware that this was a pretty turbulent time in my life for a number of reasons. I failed the midyear exam in History—failed not just by my definition (that is, less than top mark), but by the very objective definition of scoring less than 50 per cent—and I went into a total tailspin. Obviously I wasn’t good enough, so I decided to quit school and get a job. I did eventually go back to education, finishing my high school certificate at night school (TAFE) and completing several university degrees after trying out a range of ‘career’ options, from selling flowers to working in a food court. For the past twenty years I have worked as a research academic at a university. There are many excellent things about a university-based research career for an autistic person as it’s a role where success is largely determined by how deeply you can immerse yourself and become an expert in your field of interest. There are also many challenges, particularly in the social aspects of the role (see, for example, Chapter 18). My attention to detail and need for perfection serves me well in my work in many ways. When I write a journal article or a grant application I am extremely thorough. I research the topic extensively, double-check every fact, and rigidly follow the submission guidelines. I have successfully applied for more than fifty competitive research grants (including nineteen in the top echelon of Australian grant schemes) and have published more than 200 journal articles. Not bad for a girl who dropped out of school at fifteen because she failed a History exam! But what occupies my mind when I am reflecting on my career is the grant applications that were not successful and the journal articles that were rejected, and particularly the thankfully rare—but tattooed on my brain—stinging comments from reviewers about my deeply flawed writing and my underdeveloped research hypotheses. Academia has fed both my perfectionism and my fear of failure. I proofread everything I write over and over again, yet I still make unforgivable errors, like the time I wrote a journal article and left an extraneous word in the title. It doesn’t matter that three reviewers missed it, the editor missed it, and the publishing house missed it: I cannot look at that journal article on my CV without feeling as though I am back in that History exam. As with many autistic people, my perfectionism is both a strength and a liability. When internally directed, it can fan the flames of self-doubt and I see any error as an indication of my failure as a human being. When externally directed, it can annoy, irritate and upset other people. What they don’t understand is that I can’t control this compulsion. My brain is screaming at me that something is wrong, and I feel incapable of ignoring it. It also means that in my spare time I am one of those people who take great delight—and at the same time experience great consternation—in spotting spelling and grammatical errors. If you are ever really bored, pop on to a local selling board (Gumtree, Marketplace, etc.) and look at the proportion of people who claim their cupboards have ‘draws’ or the multitude of misspellings of ‘porcelain’ dolls. I realise that there are a great many legitimate reasons for people being unable to spell common words, and that I am a fundamentally bad person for being amused.2 I feel on more solid ground critiquing errors in professional publications, particularly those produced by marketing and advertising professionals. One rainy vacation I started looking through real estate listings and was both entertained and horrified by the number of errors. People are actually paying real estate agents significant sums for ‘marketing’ to have their homes described as ‘specious living’ with ‘idealic views’. After spending several hours highlighting all the errors, I considered leaving my job and setting up a business copyediting real estate listings. The fact that large successful companies pay large expensive advertising agencies to produce embarrassing mistakes for them bemuses me. First, we have simple spelling errors like ‘were the bargains are’ or ‘50% off diaries and 20% off all other stationary’. Then we have grammatical errors, such as ‘We want you’re business’ or ‘Never overestimate the quality of our ...’ Perhaps my favourite is where they miss an obvious connotation. For example, I once saw an advertisement for a rewards program with the tagline ‘[Company name]—because not everyone lives to collect air miles’. There are two very different ways of interpreting that selling proposition. By now you have probably intuited one of the challenges to my professional relationships, from primary-school group work through to managing a large team of professionals: I struggle to accept errors not only in my work, but also in theirs. When I prepare a PowerPoint presentation, I take great care to ensure that the text on every slide is the same font, size and spacing. When I write a report, everything must be correct, from the consistent formatting of headings and subheadings to the spelling and punctuation in every sentence. When other people send me drafts of work that we are completing collaboratively, I am astounded that they don’t think it matters—and that often they don’t even notice—if there are spelling, grammatical, and formatting errors. The request to ‘not worry about the spelling and formatting, but just take a look at the content’ is like asking me to ‘not worry that the living room is on fire, but just look at the tiles in the kitchen’. Notes The Kessler Psychological Distress Scale, or K10, is a widely used measure of psychological distress that can be used by health professionals to identify those in need of further assessment for anxiety and depression. I am sure that my fellow autistic readers will find errors in this book that I have missed. Yes, I will be mortified when you write and point them out to me, but I totally understand and respect your need to do so. There Is No Grey: Morality, Rights, and Wrongs When I was working my way through university, one of the many jobs I had was as a barmaid in a nightclub. Not the most glamorous of jobs, but one that fit around my university studies and an easy ‘mask’ to slip on. This was in the 1980s, when music often hid offensive words and themes behind a catchy beat. There was one song in particular that was very popular in the clubs at the time that, in a tune you could dance to, talked in quite specific terms about sexually abusing women. I spoke to the DJ several times about how much this bothered me, and the message it was sending to the crowds of young people who happily sang along to the catchy chorus. He laughed it off and said it was just a song. The next night, when I heard the first notes of the song I locked the till, shut the bar and stepped outside for the duration. As you can imagine, it wasn’t long before my boss came looking for me, steam coming out of his ears. I calmly explained that I could not remain inside selling alcohol to happy drunks while their ears were being filled with the ‘joys’ of abusing women. To say he was annoyed would be a huge understatement. He could have sacked me then and there, and I am sure he thought about it, but up until that moment I had been the perfect employee: I never arrived late, left early or drank the profits. After a rather heated discussion, we returned inside. The DJ never played that song again. Autistic people tend to have a very strong sense of morality. We know what is right and wrong; we stick to the rules and we expect other people to. It is often autistic people who take a stand against injustice, albeit usually from behind the safety of their computer keyboard. There is a tale my mother tells from my childhood. I don’t remember the event myself but have heard the story many times. When I first started school, aside from my concerns about the strangeness of the other kids in my class, I liked it. There were rules, there were routines, I knew what would happen and when it would happen, I knew what I was supposed to do and what I was not supposed to do. So the story goes that one day my mother was at home on her own with all the kids at school and thought it would be fun to pick me up and spend a few hours with me. She came to school, spoke to the teacher and explained that I had a dentist appointment so she needed to take me out of class for the rest of the day. As you can imagine, I was a bit taken aback by the sudden change to my routine (and the idea of going to the dentist), but I picked up my things and walked to the car. When we got there, Mum explained that I didn’t actually have a dentist appointment—she thought it would be nice to spend some time together. Was I delighted at this unexpected opportunity to play hooky? Apparently not. Rather, I was cross with her for taking me out of school for no good reason—changing my routine and breaking a rule. In hindsight, I imagine this probably hurt my mother’s feelings more than she let on. Most children probably would have been delighted by a surprise afternoon off school, but at that stage we had no idea that I was autistic and that my distress was due to my need to follow rules rather than a reluctance to spend time with her. At six years old, I didn’t like to break rules. I still don’t. Autistic people are generally both honest and reliable,1 and we expect other people to be the same. Lying is wrong, stealing is wrong, hurting people (or things) is wrong. I find it very difficult to pretend to like people whom I actually dislike, which makes ‘office politics’ difficult—even more so when the basis of my disregard is the moral turpitude of a person (or organisation). This is why you often see autistic people at the forefront of protests and boycotts—it is not unusual in our family for a brand to be off the shopping list, or a venue off the visit list, because the organisation has caused harm or indignity to others. I spent many years researching the marketing activities of the alcohol industry, later expanding to the tobacco, junk food and pharmaceutical industries, and the negative impact of these activities on young people. This combined my educational background,2 my highly focused interests (see Chapter 9), and my passionate belief in the need for organisations to do what is right. I have many successes in this area, but one of my great failures was when one of my honours students completed her degree and took up a marketing role with a multinational alcohol company. I was shattered. How could someone I had taught and nurtured use the skills she had gained to join the dark side? While many autistic people struggle with social interactions and have trouble making friends, when we do form a connection with someone we tend to be very loyal. This can be one of our greatest strengths but also one of our greatest vulnerabilities. Sadly, it is this loyalty and commitment that can lead to autistic people being mistreated or abused in friendships and intimate relationships. We want to make it work, we trust the other person, and we are often too ready to accept the claim that any problems in the relationship are due to our faults or to our breaches of relationship ‘rules’. My difficulty pretending to like people whom I actually dislike because of their immoral actions is even more intense when the sin they have committed is against someone I hold in high regard. Hurt me, and I will probably forgive you; hurt someone I love, and woe betide the consequences. Many years ago a colleague went through a horrible divorce due to an unfaithful and dishonest partner. She was shattered but somehow moved on and built a civil relationship with him, but I did not. I still remember the day he came to the office. Him: Is X here? Me: No, she isn’t. Him: When will she be back? Me: In an hour or so. Him: May I wait in here for her out of the rain? Me: No, you can wait outside. I could not believe that this abominable man expected me to welcome him into my personal space. My colleague could not believe that I did not let him sit inside and make himself a cup of coffee. Following my protest at the nightclub, several people commented to me that my actions had been risky. They questioned whether it was rational to take a stance that could have cost me my job. To me, though, it was the only option. I had to do something that was significant and disruptive enough to achieve the right moral outcome. That was not the first or last time that I stood up for my principles at work. My mother still recounts the story (thirty years later) of why I left the job before that one: my boss was unfairly sacked because he had a difference of opinion with the owner, and I quit the same day. I really needed and liked that job, but I was young and powerless and the only way I could make a statement was to leave. Throughout my career, my commitment to doing what is right has never wavered. What has changed is my ability to be strategic in how I respond, and—with increasing levels of seniority in my role—to have the capacity to make change without having to change jobs.3 Notes As with all generalisations, every person is different so this is not a blanket statement that all autistic people are always honest. Master’s degrees in Marketing, Public Health and Evaluation and a cross-disciplinary PhD. Although this is not always the case, as described in Chapter 17. • • Eternal Regrets: Dealing with Mistakes When I was a teenager with three siblings also at school, getting ready in the morning was always a rush. We each had limited bathroom time so that everyone got a chance to have a shower and brush their teeth. Many mornings involved a last-second rush as we scrambled to get ourselves presentable while a sibling banged on the door, shouting, ‘Hurry up, it’s my turn.’ One particular morning I realised that in my absentmindedness I had accidentally brought two pairs of socks and two pairs of knickers into the bathroom with me. I poked the spares into my pocket, hung up my towel, bundled up my pyjamas, and vacated the room. That morning we had Science, and the lesson commenced with us pinning onto the wall the posters we had been working on in our groups. Shortly after we returned to our seats, someone called out, ‘Hey, someone dropped their undies.’ The teacher scooped up the offending item with the end of his ruler and asked, ‘Does anyone want to claim these?’ and the whole class burst out in laughter. That is, the whole class except me, as I poked my hands in my pockets to confirm that I still had a pair of socks in there, but only a pair of socks. The orphaned pair of knickers sat there on a bench at the front of the classroom for the rest of the lesson. No one claimed them on the way out. I have shared this story—which up to now has been a secret known only to myself—not because it is the most embarrassing thing I have ever done (sadly, it isn’t) or because it held any significance for the rest of the class beyond a few minutes of mirth. I share it because forty years later I still remember every excruciating second of that Science lesson. Autistic people tend to be hard on themselves. When we make a mistake, we don’t just laugh and get over it: we rehash it over and over in our minds, recounting every moment that led up to it and how we could have avoided it. I am an idiot for accidentally bringing two sets of underwear into the bathroom; I am an idiot for sticking the spares in my pocket; I am an idiot for forgetting to take them out of my pocket when I got to my room; I am an idiot for letting them fall out of my pocket at school … I could quite easily have written a completely different book from this one, called Mistakes I Have Made and How I Could Have Avoided Them, but I expect it would have been torturous to read and would have had more pages than War and Peace. Here are some of the mistakes I have made that still keep me awake at night. When I was in Grade 4, there was a solar eclipse. It was a school day and the teacher warned us very strongly about the risks of looking at the sun. For our safety they kept us inside at recess, but I needed to go to the bathroom. I walked from our classroom to the toilet block, studiously looking at the ground to avoid any risk of permanent blindness, and accidentally walked into the boys’ bathroom. I don’t know whether anyone saw me, but in my mind every kid in my class watched me walk into the wrong bathroom. When I was in Grade 8 I had my first crush on a boy and decided to tell him how I felt. I wrote out what I wanted to say and called him from a public phone. His mum answered. I asked to speak to Bill,1 his mum handed over the phone, he said hello and I recited my script. There was a horrible moment of silence, and then: ‘This is Bill senior, I think you want to talk to my son. I’ll get him for you.’ I hung up and never spoke to that boy again. • • • In my first post-university job, I worked in an investigative unit in the public service. In that role we did a lot of ‘home visits’ and were rarely welcome. One woman wrote a lengthy letter of complaint to the director following our visit to her. I can’t remember what else was in the (very long) letter, but the line tattooed on my brain is ‘The female officer did not wipe her feet on the mat and tracked dirt on our carpet’. In 2010 I wrote a journal article with a junior colleague, and when he received the reviewers’ comments he was quite devastated. He forwarded the email to me and I realised he needed reassurance. I emailed him back and said not to worry because (a) a lot of the comments from one of the reviewers were nonsense and just demonstrated that they didn’t know much about research, and (b) the journal was going to publish the paper anyway so we only needed to fix the bits we agreed were wrong. About ten minutes later I received an email from the journal’s editor (whom I had not realised was cc’ed) acknowledging my perspective but asking that I take the process a little more seriously. That was more than ten years ago and I have published over 120 journal articles since then, but I still cringe every time I scroll through my CV and see that article in my list of publications. A couple of years ago I went to visit my oldest sister in Perth. Our parents picked me up from the airport and drove me to her house. Hugs, hellos, now what? When all else fails, make tea (our family motto). I filled the kettle, placed it on the stove, turned the hotplate on, and busied myself looking for cups and teaspoons. Before long there was a strange smell, followed by my father leaping from his chair, yelling, ‘The kettle’s on fire!’ It was an electric kettle—the kind you plug into a power point, not the kind you heat on a stove —and it was a burning, melting mess. In my defence, it was shaped like a regular kettle, with a handle and a spout. I could also attribute my error to the fact that I was, as usual, feeling anxious—not about seeing my sister (that part I was excited about), but about getting to the airport on time; getting on the right plane; finding my parents at the airport; the trip to my sister’s house; my sister’s health (part of the reason for my visit was her having medical treatment); being, and sleeping, in a new place; what I would be able to eat; what would happen at the hospital ... I was mortified. I wanted to race out immediately and get a new kettle but my sister was gracious and forgiving, as always, and found a saucepan we could boil water in. I still think about that kettle every time I make a cup of tea. Those are just five of many examples. If I were writing that other book, I could relate in excruciating detail every drink I have knocked over, every plate I have broken, every time I have forgotten my phone charger or notes or keys, and every wrong/dumb answer I have given to a question. This fear of doing something wrong probably comes from a combination of a need for acceptance, a feeling of inadequacy (often from a lifetime of not being exactly who others expect me to be), and an underlying level of anxiety. The effects of this fear can be significant. As I have already noted, when autistic people make a mistake they dwell on it for a long time, often internalising it as an indication of their inadequacy as a human being, where most neurotypicals would define it as an accident or mishap and move on. But this constant anxiety doesn’t just impact on our lives after we make a mistake; it also causes many of us to live at a heightened level of anxiety, and impacts on our willingness to take risks. I don’t mean risks like jumping from a plane: I mean risks like speaking in a meeting or joining in a social activity. What if I don’t say anything and they think I am stupid or uninterested? What if I do say something and it comes out wrong or I have misunderstood the context and they know I am stupid? When I was a teenager working in a part-time job and the boss asked to see me, I would immediately assume I had done something wrong and was about to get yelled at or fired. Had I counted out someone’s change wrong? Had I messed up someone’s order? Had I upset a customer because I hadn’t made the right kind of small talk? Usually the boss wanted to see me because he wanted me to order more cheese, or work an extra shift, or help him move a box. Even so, the next time he asked to see me, my immediate thought would again be ‘What have I done wrong?’ I would like to say that as I became older and wiser I grew out of the constant fear of doing something foolish or unforgivable. However, at more than fifty years old I still get that sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach when the boss asks to see me. I am in a very senior role, I am (objectively) very good at my job, and I have a very supportive and understanding boss. I have made two major mistakes since I started working for him several years ago—major by my standards, but perhaps not by others’. For example, I once drafted a letter for his signature to advise someone that a travel funding application had been unsuccessful. As these were letters we did every year, I cut-and-pasted the previous one, then carefully edited the name, contact information, date, rationale and so on. But I forgot to change the location, and the unsuccessful applicant contacted the office to check whether this meant that his application was still pending (because he hadn’t asked to go to that location). What a colossal error, I thought. What an abject failure of a human being I am. There is no way my boss could ever forgive such a monumental stuff-up. I was already packing my bags and working out how to tell my family that I was unemployed when my boss rang to talk through how we would respond to the email. We dealt with the issue and apologised to the applicant, and the boss went on with his day. I sat there waiting for the axe to fall. It was almost a week before we next had cause to speak, by which stage my anxiety levels were off the chart. He greeted me in the same way he always had and started chatting about what we had on the agenda for the next week. I was shocked that he had clearly forgiven me. He would probably be equally shocked to know that I have not forgiven me. Two years later, I still replay that event over and over in my head. It is not just my current boss that I do this with: it is every boss I have ever had, my colleagues, my staff, even friends and family members. When one of my staff emails to say they want to make a time to talk to me, my immediate thought is that they are unhappy and planning to resign, and that clearly in some way I have failed as a manager. I have had several discussions with my psychologist about my visceral reaction to requests ‘to talk’. For example, she talked me through the situation with my current boss (whom I really enjoy working for, and who is more aware and accepting of my autistic quirks than any previous boss I have had). Psychologist: How many times do you estimate your boss has called you or asked to speak to you since you have been working for him? Me: At least a couple of hundred. Psychologist: How many of those times have been because you have done something wrong? Me: Two. Psychologist: How many of those times have been because you have done something right —to congratulate you on an outcome or thank you for something? Me: About forty or fifty. Psychologist: How many of those times have been something neutral, like just asking a question or passing on information? Me: Pretty much all the other times. Psychologist: So what you need to do is to keep that in perspective. When the boss asks to speak to you, ask yourself those same questions, think about how much you like and respect each other, and remind yourself of all the times he has called to say something positive or something neutral. That was great advice. I am still working on it! Notes Name changed to protect the innocent. • • • Part 3 What Are ‘Deficits in Social Communication and Interaction’? To be diagnosed with autism under DSM-5, a child1 must have, among other criteria, persistent deficits in each of three areas of social communication and interaction: deficits in social-emotional reciprocity; deficits in non-verbal communicative behaviours; and deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships. What does this mean in the world outside a diagnostic manual? Chapters 14 to 27 describe my experiences, and understanding, of (as described in DSM-5) ‘Deficits in social communication and interaction’. The use of the word ‘child’ is misleading. As noted elsewhere in this book, autism is a lifelong condition, not a childhood phase. Shhh, There Are People Out There: Social Interaction A typical Sunday afternoon in our house … I was in the lounge room at one end of the house, doing a jigsaw puzzle; my younger son was in the living room at the other end of the house, creating characters to illustrate his stories; and my husband was outside playing with power tools. Calm, peaceful, everyone in their happy place ... Then I heard voices coming from the kitchen. One was my husband’s, so that was fine. The other voice I didn’t recognise, so I realised we must have a visitor. What did I do? (If you think I went out and said hello, you are dreaming.) I texted my husband: ‘Who is in the house?’ I waited. No reply. I stopped shuffling jigsaw pieces and sat there very quietly. The voices got nearer. I could make out my husband’s voice describing light fittings and electrical appliances. A-ha, he was showing someone our newly renovated house—but who? He hadn’t said we were expecting anyone. The voices got nearer. They were in the office, just on the other side of my door. I sat even more quietly (if that is possible), holding my breath. My husband spoke: ‘And that’s Sandra’s area up there.’ Brief silence and they moved off in another direction. I love my husband! When the route was clear, I made a rapid dash into the living room. Me: There is someone in the house. Do you know who it is? Son: I don’t know. We weren’t expecting anyone. Let’s just stay very quiet. Me: OK. I’m going to dash back to my room while the coast is clear. Eventually we heard the unmistakable sound of goodbyes and my husband reappeared. My son came flying out of the living room and confronted him. Son: You brought people into our house!!! Husband: Yes, it was our neighbour and his son. I was showing them the renovations. Son: Are you crazy? You gave us no warning at all. Mum and I were so anxious. You can’t just bring people into the house without telling us first. This is our home! Social interaction is hard. While every autistic person is different, we all have challenges with interpersonal communication. Whether we are non-vocal and use augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) or are garrulous and seemingly articulate, the nuances of interpersonal communication can cause us great stress and confusion. Many of us learn to communicate in a seemingly neurotypical way, but like any unnatural learnt behaviour it takes energy and concentration. That means that casual social interaction of the kind that many neurotypical people find routine can be stressful and draining for autistic people. Conversations with strangers are problematic as they combine social anxiety and discomfort with unclear expectations. A typical day can be full of potential landmines. I walk along the footpath. People are walking towards me, getting closer. Am I on the right side of the path? My husband said I should stay left, but they are staying right ... Should I move over? How close is too close? If I let them get too near me I will feel anxious, but if I veer away from them they might think I am judging them negatively. Should I look at them or look down? If I look at them I will feel weird, but if I look down they might think I am snubbing them ... but if I look at them they might think I am staring. Should I smile? If I don’t smile they might think I am rude, but if I do smile they might think I am creepy ... The person ahead of me is handing out flyers. Oh no, they are looking right at me. Should I look at them? Is it rude to just keep walking? If I look at my phone will they focus on someone else? I walk across the lobby in my office building and the building managers are there, talking. Should I say good morning? If I stay silent they might think I am rude, but if I speak will I be interrupting their meeting? And what should I say if I do speak? I get in the elevator in my office. Should I greet the people in here? If I stay silent they might think I am unfriendly, but if I speak they might think I am strange ... If I say hello they might think I know them, but what if I don’t say hello and I do know them? Maybe I should just look at my phone screen and act like I am texting ... This is just the trip to the office in the morning. Then there are all the other parts of life, like grocery shopping (What are the right things to say to the checkout operator? Should I talk to the other people in the queue?), public transport (drivers, conductors, other passengers), running into the neighbours when I am hanging out the washing ... Like many autistic people, I feel very comfortable talking about my special interests (and have to constantly remind myself that other people may not find them quite so interesting and in fact might prefer to talk about something else). In a work context, this can be a real strength. I can stand in front of a group of people—whether a class of twenty students or an auditorium of hundreds of community members—and speak eloquently about my research. This is relatively easy because (a) I am confident in my knowledge of what I am talking about; (b) I can reasonably assume that the people in the room are interested, or they wouldn’t be there; and (c) I don’t have to worry about the nuances of verbal and non-verbal communication that complicate two-way conversations. However, it can also be a challenge. The majority of people do not like public speaking, so when they see me ‘in action’ they assume I am a confident, outgoing person. When they meet me afterwards and my conversation seems stilted or uncomfortable, they assume that I am unfriendly rather than realising that I am just too far out of my comfort zone. (Is it my turn to talk? What should I say? What would be interesting to them?) I am not a person who confidently approaches others and starts up a conversation. If I see someone I would like to talk to (an expert in my area of interest, someone I look up to, a senior colleague, a celebrity, someone I have met before), I think about going up to say hello. Most times I think about it for so long that they have gone before I have built up the courage. My thought process goes a bit like this: Oh, there’s X, I would really like to talk to them ... Will they know who I am? How will I (re)introduce myself? Now they are talking to someone else. I better not interrupt ... I’ll just stand here for a while ... OK, they are alone again, here I go ... but what should I say? What do I have to tell them that they might be interested in? Maybe I could talk to them about (abc)? Yes, that’s it ... Now, what should I say first? Oh, too slow, now someone else is approaching them ... I’ll just wait until they are free ... OK, here I go ... Oh, it looks like someone else is heading that way ... they are much more interesting than me ... Perhaps I could join that conversation ... I’ll just hover over here and hope they notice me ... Should I look at them and smile, or will they think I am interrupting? Now they are both laughing ... Lucky I didn’t try to approach them, they seem to be really enjoying the conversation ... I’ll just wait a bit ... Oh, they are leaving. I find working in an office exhausting. Not the work itself—I love what I do and could happily work twelve hours a day—but the meetings, the phone calls, the videoconferences, those things that call on me to use all of my senses simultaneously and to keep my ‘neurotypical mask’ from slipping. One of the great joys of moving into a leadership position was being able to decline invitations to regular social catch-ups with the team ‘because it will be hard for people to relax over a glass of wine if the boss is there’. Just to be clear, I really like, respect and value the amazing team of people I work with. I care deeply about each one of them. I just find informal conversation challenging. The part I like least about being a grown-up is ‘networking’—meeting new people and trying to make interesting conversation with them. This can be very challenging in a work context1 and in a social context, but it becomes even more complex when the lines between the two are blurred— for example, dinner events with colleagues or collaborators from other workplaces or community partners. I am constantly amazed at how people at such events seem to be able to move seamlessly between serious conversation (‘Fascinating speaker, what do you think about his view that ... ?’) and small talk (‘What are your plans for the weekend?’). The first question feels like an exam question— there is a right answer and I may look foolish if I get it wrong. The second question is a minefield—I can’t tell them what I really have planned (for example, reading a book or engaging in my SPIN), so I have to invent something that makes me sound professional but not boring. By the time I have worked out an answer, the conversation has switched channels. This is where having a socially competent partner as your dinner companion is super-helpful. It’s like a game of tennis doubles: I’ll answer the ones I can catch and you can answer all the ones I would fall over myself trying to reach. My husband is not autistic. In fact, in a social sense, he is the antithesis of a stereotypical autistic person. He is very gregarious and friendly and gets along with everyone. He’s one of these people who can strike up a conversation with a random stranger with apparent ease, and within an hour that stranger is a friend. Everywhere he goes he runs into someone he knows: he can go on a five-minute trip to the grocery store and be gone for an hour because he has run into someone he knows, possibly someone he met twenty-five years ago and hasn’t seen since but somehow they recognise each other. In such cases he can immediately strike up a conversation as easily as breathing. The considerable difference in our level of comfort with social interaction brings both strengths and challenges. One of the real positives of him being so social and comfortable talking to people is that he’s quite happy to do a lot of the generic social interaction that the rest of our family finds draining. He’s happy to go to the grocery store, do the shopping, and banter with the checkout operator, random customers and anyone else who strikes up a conversation. He’s also happy to cover for the rest of us by engaging in these conversations while we manage to make ourselves look very busy and distracted because the idea of speaking to someone we don’t know is extremely stressful. So for the rest of the family, it is pretty much a positive. On the other hand, it poses some challenges for him. For example, on a number of occasions he’s been in the situation where he’s been working somewhere and got to know his colleagues quite well. He attends the various social functions, explaining that his wife is unable to attend because she is ‘busy working’ or ‘away travelling’. For the most part people accept that he has a very busy wife, which is in fact true given my job and other commitments. However, every so often they begin to doubt that he actually has a wife. This is particularly the case in jobs that involve working unusual hours or having lots of telephone conversations with other people. Apparently, it is common for other spouses in such situations to be suspicious and jealous or even just eager to be a part of this other aspect of their partner’s life, so they welcome work functions where spouses are invited to meet and socialise with colleagues and their partners. I am delighted when my husband is happy at work and likes the people he works with, and very happy for him to socialise with them. Typically, I find that the amount of social interaction required of me in my own working week uses up all of my social energy so that when the evening or the weekend comes, I don’t have any left for socialising with people outside of our household, nor do I have the desire to do so. This can be even more problematic when the people in question are not just my husband’s work colleagues but his friends. To this day my husband has good friends he’s known for years, or even decades, who have never met me or the children. They make jokes about his imaginary wife, but sometimes I think they might seriously wonder whether I exist. My husband accepts my need to avoid social interaction. Sometimes, when it gets to the point that he’s concerned that people might actually be offended by my seeming unwillingness to meet them, he does ask me to come along to a social event or to visit someone at their house. In these instances, I tend to go because I know how important it must be for him to have asked me. This takes a lot of preparation, clear parameters (particularly around how long we will stay) and agreeing on an ‘exit word’. The downside of his gregarious nature and his genuine enjoyment of social interaction is that this doesn’t always work: he will completely forget about the time limit, not hear the exit word, or not notice me zoning out from social exhaustion. He can also be very creative in finding ways to minimise the stress it causes me (or find a strong enough incentive to socialise). For example, he has a very good friend who lives in Bendigo and for years has been inviting ‘us’ to visit. Every time my husband went to visit, he would head off armed with a plausible reason why I was unable to join him. When the time came that he finally said, ‘I would really like you to come’, I knew it was really important for him. Thankfully he arranged for us to go to a car-racing event that his friend was competing in, which provided a natural restriction on the amount of social energy needed for the encounter. Later that year we discovered that there is an annual doll show in Bendigo—the perfect opportunity to meet both of our needs. We had a lovely weekend. We met with his friends for a couple of meals, he spent time with them for longer periods while I attended the doll show, and we had some relaxing time together with just the two of us. When our older son met his partner, we were delighted. She is absolutely lovely and I couldn’t have chosen better for him (even if he’d let me). Somehow she just accepted us all exactly as we are, and blended into our family like she had always been there. That was easy, so surely meeting her family would be easy, too. The first time her family invited us over for dinner, I was really anxious. What should I wear? What should I talk to them about? What could we have in common? What if I said (or did) something weird and embarrassed my son? What if they thought I was weird or rude? When we arrived, one of the first things they said was that they were aware that my younger son might not want to sit with us all evening and that there was a room he could use if he wanted to spend time alone (I was so jealous of him at that moment!). The most important thing an autistic person can have in a situation such as this is a supportive family, and I am so lucky to have mine. Between my husband prepping me with potential conversation starters, my son reassuring me that I could never embarrass him, and his partner noticing when I needed a break, it was a really nice evening. The only downside was my husband not looking at his watch, so by the time we left I was exhausted. When my husband read the first draft of this chapter, he commented that I had downplayed the challenges that social interaction poses and the impact these challenges have on my life. I have described the sensory/energy challenges (feeling stressed, anxious and exhausted by social interaction) but not the long-term impacts on my self-confidence and the way I (and other people) see me. I have always been conscious of how other people make social interaction look easy and enjoyable, and have seen my struggles as evidence of my inadequacy. From childhood onwards I have been described as aloof, unfriendly and even intimidating, and I have internalised these interpretations. Since my diagnosis and my increasingly candid interactions with other autistic people, I have come to understand and accept that it is part and parcel of my autism and not something I can overcome by ‘trying harder’. This realisation makes me feel a bit better about myself, but it doesn’t make the social interaction any easier. I like (most) people and I want to have positive relationships, but it remains a constant trade-off between what others expect and what I am capable of. The world will need to be a much more accepting and understanding place before autistic people can confidently say, ‘I really want to be your friend, but I only have the energy to see you once a month’ or ‘Yes, I will come to the after-work function but only if I can sit in a quiet corner and leave after twenty minutes’. This impacts on friendships. Making friends, and understanding and meeting other people’s expectations of friendship, can be confusing and challenging. My challenges with understanding non-verbal and social cues mean that I am constantly worried that I will say or do something that offends or irritates the other person, and that I am painfully aware of the potential that I will misinterpret their intentions. Are they just being polite, or do they actually want to talk to me? Are they looking the other way because I am boring them? Am I talking too much, or not enough? If I go over and say hello, will they think I am a stalker? If I don’t say hello, will they think I am rude? Did they not return my call because they are busy, or because they don’t want to be friends anymore? It also impacts on my inclusion in broader social groups. I spent many years at university but did not make any ‘friends’ because I was never sure how (or whether) to progress beyond conversations about the topic of study. I never made friends with the other mothers at my children’s schools because I couldn’t work out how to strike up a conversation when they all seemed so confident interacting with each other. It also impacts on my career. I could write another book on opportunities lost as a result of not knowing how to initiate an interaction at work events and conferences, not having the confidence to network at social functions, not expressing my views at meetings, and not making the ‘political’ connections that seem to be essential for advancing a professional career. Every autistic person is different, but we all have our challenges with social interaction. Some (like my younger son) are extremely good at striking up conversations and engaging in banter; others (like me and my older son) find casual social interaction confusing and exhausting. If I were to offer one recommendation to non-autistic people about this, it would be not to interpret our behaviour through a neurotypical lens. If we seem awkward or uncomfortable talking to you, it is likely that we are unsure how to interact, not that we don’t like you. If we decline social invitations, it is likely that we are socially exhausted, not that we are unfriendly. If we say something that offends you, it is likely that we have misread a social rule or are just being straightforward in our communication, not that we are rude or wanted to hurt your feelings. If we don’t speak up in meetings, it is likely that we are not sure how and when to interject, not that we have nothing to say. Notes ... but that’s another book. I Can’t Find the Rulebook: (Not) Understanding Social Rules When I was at school, I was the shortest kid in my class. That was not something that concerned me: it was just a fact. Sure, there was the occasional joke about it, but in the grand scheme of all the other things kids found to tease and bully me about, my height was not something that caused me anxiety. One day I was walking across the quad to the library and I saw a girl who was shorter than me. She was probably in the grade below mine, as I hadn’t seen her before. I was so surprised to see someone who was noticeably shorter than me that I overcame my usual resistance to talking to strangers and said, ‘Wow, how about that—you are the first person I have met at school who is shorter than me. Congratulations!’ I can’t remember whether she said anything in response; for me, the communication was complete—I had imparted a fact. What I do remember is that about ten seconds later the voice of one of my favourite teachers rang out behind me: ‘Sandra Jones, I am so disappointed in you!’ I was startled. A teacher disappointed with me? What could I possibly have done? There followed a lecture about bullying: the teacher had seen my interaction with the other student as me being deliberately mean, and was surprised that someone who had been a consistent victim of bullying could be cruel to someone else. I was confused and dismayed. I knew what bullying was: calling someone a weirdo or stealing someone’s lunch or deliberately knocking them over. I was not a bully. I was not mean. I had simply observed a fact and commented on it. But I didn’t argue with her, because you don’t argue with teachers. I hung my head in shame and apologised for my behaviour. Autistic people like rules.1 They give us a sense of certainty and predictability that helps to make sense of an often chaotic world. So why do so many of us struggle with social rules? I think that for me at least, it is because rules work when they (a) are consistent, and (b) make sense, but many social rules fail on one or both of these measures. That means these rules are hard to learn and hard to follow. Don’t talk to strangers! That is a very simple rule we are all taught as children. I liked that rule when I was a kid, but as I grew older I realised it actually has many confusing nuances. On face value, it is simplicity itself: if I don’t know you, then I don’t talk to you. EXCEPT ... you get into trouble if you don’t greet your parents’ visitors, because it’s good manners to talk to those strangers, or if you don’t let random aunts and cousins hug you, because you are related to those strangers, or if ... (the list goes on). One of the earliest social rules most of us learn is the importance of telling the truth. It is something our parents teach us as soon as we can talk and is the subject of many proverbs, books, songs, poems and etiquette books. However, it is also one of the most complex and confusing social rules because there are so many unspoken ‘ifs and buts’. This golden rule has an equally important but often conflicting partner: don’t say things that might offend or hurt people’s feelings. So the rule is actually: (a) (b) (c) Always tell the truth unless the truth isn’t ‘polite’ or might hurt someone’s feelings and instinctively know when (b) overrides (a). Many autistic people are naturally honest. We are not good at deception or at detecting deception in others. So we are very comfortable with (a) but can really struggle with (b) and are totally perplexed by (c). As we get older and experience more of life’s lessons, like the one I experienced at school, we (hopefully) begin to learn some of the nuances. However, it doesn’t become easy or instinctual. For example, ‘Tell the truth except when it might hurt someone’s feelings.’ I can understand the logic of that one, but being able to implement it means that I don’t just need to know what facts might hurt my feelings: I also need to be able to intuit which facts might hurt your feelings. That is a pretty tough ask for someone who experiences the world in a very different way from their neurotypical peers. I have learnt that it is offensive to call someone fat, ugly or stupid as these are (in our current society) characteristics that are not socially desirable. Going back to my high-school example, I do not see my height as something that has an impact on my value as a human being, and have never been offended by being advised of my height relative to the height of others, so it did not occur to me that this ‘fact’ crossed the line into ‘hurtful comment’ territory. So, as an autistic person, I need to collate and recall a complete list of all the things that could potentially fall into the category of ‘might hurt someone’s feelings’. It’s a pretty long list! Imagine walking around with such a list in your head and trying to run through it before you make an attempt at commenting on any aspect of a person’s appearance or character. Imagine being a person who already struggles with initiating conversations and engaging in small talk, and you will start to understand just how tricky it is to give a compliment (which for many neurotypical people is the lifeblood of casual conversation). One of the more complex nuances of the ‘rule’—and one I am still struggling to learn—is that the same statement can be complimentary or offensive depending on who you are referring to. People are comfortable with me stating the fact that my husband is intelligent (a compliment), but uncomfortable with me stating the fact that I am intelligent (that is seen as boastful or egotistical). It is totally fine, and perhaps even loving, to me to state that my husband is a better cook than I am, but it is totally scandalous for me to state that I am more intelligent than my husband (I know this because it is something I have said and been soundly chastised for). Both of the statements are objectively true. My husband cooks delicious, nutritious food that the whole family loves to eat; his ‘I think I’ll make stir-fry tonight’ is met with a resounding cheer. I know how to stick a fork in a frozen meal and press the buttons on the microwave. My full-scale IQ is in the 99th percentile. My husband is very bright but not in the 99th percentile. This nuance includes not only who the person is but also what the context is, as my younger son has discovered. He is more gregarious and willing to talk to strangers than I am, which has led to some uncomfortable conversations in elevators. For example, he has learnt that it is polite to compliment someone on their clothing, but once when we got into an elevator in the city with two casually dressed (and somewhat intoxicated) young men, his comment ‘That’s a nice T-shirt you are wearing’ was met with a less than positive response. When you add to all this complexity the fact that following these rules often requires us to act in a way that is totally alien to our natural instincts, you can see why sometimes we struggle to understand and follow them. To this day I still struggle to understand the complex and counterintuitive rules around greeting people. To me, the purpose of communication is to communicate, so if I don’t have anything to say, my natural instinct is not to say anything. But that leads to all sorts of problems and confusions. Why do people ask you how you are when they don’t actually want to know? I have learnt—and constantly remind myself—that this is not a literal question that requires a literal answer. This is how the conversation is meant to go: Person: Hi Sandra, how are you? Me: Hi Person. I am fine, thanks. How are you? Person: I am fine, thanks. I know that. I rehearse it in my head. But all too often it goes like this: Person: Hi Sandra, how are you? Me: I am feeling a bit stressed today. I have a bit of a headache and my ear is super-itchy. I have about twenty-four things on my to-do list and I don’t know where to start, so I am feeling overwhelmed. Person: Oh ... Why am I expected to say hello to everyone in the office every morning? I saw them yesterday, I see them today, I will see them tomorrow. If I have something I need to say to them, I will say it, and if they have something they need to say to me, I will listen. It seems so arbitrary to say hello to each of them every morning and goodbye to each of them every afternoon. It also takes a lot of emotional energy. I worry that I might miss someone, that I might get someone’s name wrong, that I might not sound natural and friendly, that they might ask me a question or try to make small talk and I won’t be able to follow through on the conversation. But I don’t want to offend anyone or seem unfriendly, so I go through the routine each morning and by the time I get to my desk I am tired. That’s not to mention all the other complexities. What if I go out to get lunch and when I come back I walk past them. Do I say hello again? Do I seem rude if I don’t? Do I seem creepy if I do? I have developed all sorts of elaborate coping strategies for these dilemmas. I have worked out ways of navigating from the office front door to my desk without walking past anyone. I wait until everyone else has left for the day before I leave the office. I have mastered the art of looking like I am in an important conversation on my mobile phone. On days when I am really low on energy, I settle for a loud group greeting: ‘Good morning, everyone.’ Recently my family underwent a major renovation of our home, which meant we had builders in the house every day for months. In addition to the stress of having extra people in the house (a major trigger for me), the arbitrary-greeting thing reared its ugly head. Logic said I should say good morning when they arrived, and I could manage that. But what should I do the rest of the day? Was the expectation that I say something each time I passed them, or they passed me? How was I ever going to come up with enough interesting pieces of small talk to get through each day? After hiding in my room for several days and going without lunch, I asked my husband to clarify the correct protocol. His advice was to say hello the first time I saw them each morning, and after that it was OK to just walk past because they would be working and wouldn’t expect me to stop and talk. If they asked me a question or said something to me, I should respond. My inherent focus on communication having a purpose, combined with my tendency to hyper-focus on the task at hand and my limited capacity to intuit and understand other people’s feelings, causes ongoing angst in my personal and professional life. When I am at work and I have to call someone to ask a question or impart information, the conversation typically goes like this: Person: Hello, this is X. Me: Hi X. I received your request for the finance figures and I have the numbers here ... Person (at the same time): Hi Sandra, how are you going? Me (thinking ‘Oh no, I did it again’): I’m fine, thank you. How are you? Person: I’m great, thanks. We have some terrific weather here in Brisbane—what’s it like in Melbourne? Me (now thoroughly confused and probably having no idea what the weather is like): Um, it’s lovely here in Melbourne too. This is usually followed by a period of silence as I castigate myself for my hopeless social skills while wondering if it is too soon to return to the purpose of the call. Similarly, when I send emails to colleagues or staff members, my communications tend to be brief, clear and to the point. I convey the information that needs to be conveyed. It was a long time before I realised that people may interpret this as being unfriendly or displeased with them. Many people add extraneous information in their emails (I hope you are well, the flowers are blooming today, have a nice day) and expect others to do likewise. This seems counterintuitive to me: if I fill up an email with lots of irrelevant information, I am wasting my time (writing it), wasting your time (reading it), and increasing the likelihood of miscommunication. I now put these additional bits in to my communications, but it is very much a learnt behaviour and the first thing I forget if I am rushed, stressed or preoccupied. This creates a vicious circle in my workplace: I remind myself to put the niceties in there, people expect them, and then when I forget they think they have done something wrong and I am upset with them. We had a family friend2 manage our recent renovations. She is an experienced interior designer and project manager, and it was a relief for me to be able to answer the millions of questions from tradespeople with nothing more than ‘I don’t know—you’ll have to ask the designer’. She organised each step of the process, consulting us on the big decisions but not bothering us with the little ones, and sending regular invoices to the various tradespeople. All was going well until this conversation with my son: Son: Mum, are you upset with her? Me: No, why would I be? Son: I don’t know. She thinks you might be because you haven’t replied to her questions. Me: What questions? Son: In her emails to you. Me: No, I’m sure I have responded to all her emails. Together, my son and I looked at the emails. A-ha! Each one started with a piece of information (for example, ‘The cabinets have been completed’) and a request to pay the associated invoice. In each case I downloaded the invoice and paid it immediately. I thought I was being efficient and making her life easy. It wasn’t until the day of this conversation that I realised (with assistance from my son) that she also expected a response to the unrelated questions that I had assumed were just social padding (for example, ‘How are you three? Hope all is well’). Anyone who has (older) siblings will probably have had an experience like this: Your siblings invite you to play a board game with them. You are excited about the opportunity to play, but a little nervous about not knowing the rules (What if I make a mistake?) You start playing and within minutes it becomes what seems like a chorus of ‘You can’t do that ... That’s against the rules ... No, silly, you can’t move your piece that way’. By the end of the game you are feeling really deflated. (I am stupid. I will never get this. They won’t want to play with me anymore because I keep getting it wrong.) You save up your pocket money and buy yourself the same game. You study all the pieces and all the spaces on the board, and you read the manual from cover to cover. You learn every rule. A lot of them don’t make sense and some of them seem to contradict each other, but you are determined to be good at this game so you memorise every word. A few weeks later your siblings invite you to play again. You are excited. This time not only do you get to join in, but you know the rules! Ten minutes into the game: ‘What are you doing? You can’t do that.’ Your brain rapidly scans through the memorised rules. Nope, nothing! Tentatively, you try to explain that the rules don’t say that, only to be met with a condescending, ‘No, it isn’t written in the rulebook. It doesn’t need to be. Everyone just knows.’ The next time your siblings ask if you want to play, you tell them you can’t because you have homework. In my autistic world, we call this game ‘Life’. If you are a non-autistic person trying to support an autistic family member, friend or colleague, it is really important to remember that we process and use communication differently from other people. Don’t assume that we are rude or difficult if we get the nuances of social communication and social norms wrong. Try to understand that most of the time when we get it right we are utilising conscious effort and energy to behave and communicate in a way that is not natural—and often not logical—to us, and sometimes we are just too overwhelmed, distracted or exhausted to keep up the role ascribed to us by neurotypical society. Notes This is a generalisation based on the autistic people I have met and the research I have done. We are all different, and I am sure there are some autistic people who don’t like rules. Blurry line here between ‘family’ and ‘friend’—it was our older son’s partner’s mother. Don’t Look in My Eyes: Eye Contact and Communication When I first started writing this chapter, I struggled to think of an example that demonstrated my discomfort with eye contact. Given that eye contact is one of my constant sources of anxiety in social interactions, this was a bit strange. I asked my husband: Me: Can you think of a specific example I could use? Husband: You could use us as an example. Me: I guess so. You mean the fact that I make eye contact with you and the kids but no one else? Husband (somewhat cautiously): No, I mean the way that you often look down or away when we are talking and I know that means you are listening to me. Or maybe the way that when you do look at me, I tend to look away so you will feel more comfortable. Me: Oh ... After all these years I thought I was so comfortable with my husband that I made excellent eye contact with him, but the reality was that he had just never felt the need to point out that I often don’t look at him when we talk. While the subjects of eye contact, sensory challenges, and social skills overlap, the importance of eye contact in my social and work interactions, and the prevalence of the neurotypical views about the importance of eye contact, make it deserving of its own chapter. Difficulty with eye contact is often described as a common symptom or defining feature of autism, although there can be a range of other reasons for a person not making eye contact, such as shyness. That is not to say that all autistic people experience difficulties with making eye contact—indeed, some find it comfortable and natural—but for many of us it is a challenge that has a daily impact on our social interactions and our emotional wellbeing. In my (predominantly autistic) family, all of our best conversations happen when we are sitting side-by-side. My husband realised when the children were young that the best way to have a meaningful conversation with them was to go for a drive in the car; our younger son in particular still shares his deepest thoughts and ideas when the two of them head off on a long road trip. When we discussed this recently as a family, my older son commented on the fact that in every home we have lived in we have set up our living area with all the chairs side-by-side, never facing each other. I did a quick Google Image search and much to my surprise discovered that this is not the typical furniture arrangement! In the non-autistic community, eye contact is seen to have a number of clear meanings and purposes: it is polite, shows you are paying attention, establishes a connection with the person you are talking to, enhances communication, and conveys honesty and trustworthiness. In the words of an influential communication trainer, ‘Eye contact is one of the easiest and most powerful ways to make a person feel recognised, understood and validated.’1 That is, unless you are one of the many autistic people who find eye contact unnatural, uncomfortable, stressful and even painful. I grew up being constantly reminded by my parents, my teachers and, as I entered adolescence, my peers to ‘Look at me when I am speaking to you’ and to ‘Pay attention’. At that time, no one (including me) knew that I was autistic, so these instructions were based on the generally accepted wisdom that eye contact meant you were paying attention, and a lack of eye contact meant you were not. I assumed that everyone found eye contact as unnatural and uncomfortable as I did but that they did a much better job of coping with it. This was just one more example of my failings as a human being, and one more thing I had to work harder on. Like many autistic people, I learnt strategies to ‘fake’ eye contact when I could. I also learnt when I couldn’t get away with faking it and how to force myself to look directly into people’s eyes, and to accept that I would miss large parts of the conversation by doing so. The need to make (or fake) eye contact escalates with age. When you become an adult, social interactions become more frequent, more intense, and more varied. As I discuss in Chapter 14, social interaction takes a lot of energy. Add eye contact—and the need to maintain the ‘right’ facial expression to go with it—to the mix and conversations, even with people you like and find interesting, become emotionally and physically draining. When the COVID-19 pandemic hit and Melbourne went into lockdown like so many cities around the world, most of our interactions moved online. This included working, socialising, shopping, and even having medical care delivered online. For the most part, I found lockdown quite enjoyable. The break from constant social interactions was a relief: no worrying about whether to smile at people in the street, what to say to people in the elevator, or how much time to allocate to small talk with colleagues. I found myself much calmer and happier (and definitely more productive). At the end of the workday I often had enough energy left to interact with my family—except on the days I had several meetings. Working online meant that all meetings became videoconferences, and suddenly all of my eye-contact-minimising strategies were unavailable to me. People were no longer spread around a meeting table, enabling me to fake eye contact (look at their hair, look in between two people, move my gaze around as if I am looking at different people). Instead, they were right there on my computer screen—close-up faces with enormous eyes looking directly into mine and expecting me to look directly into theirs. That left me with two options: look away and have them think I was not paying attention, or look at them and struggle to follow and participate in the conversation. If I had more than two or three meetings in a day, I would get to the afternoon feeling absolutely exhausted, unable to form a sentence or even a thought. Over time, I developed a range of coping strategies that helped me get through the working week. Perhaps the easiest and most socially acceptable was to blame the technology: ‘Sorry, my video isn’t working’ or ‘Our internet connection is really slow, so I have to turn the video off or the call will drop out’. As the lockdown dragged on, I got brave enough to be open with people I felt comfortable with (particularly my work team) and to admit that I found it much easier to focus and interact with the video off. Perhaps one of the most effective strategies I developed (and one that I still use post-lockdown when I have too many video meetings) is to open a document on my computer and place it over the meeting stream. That way I can look at the screen without having to look in people’s eyes and can engage happily and meaningfully in the meeting. The bonus of this approach is that to the people on the other side it looks like I am making wonderful eye contact as I am looking directly ‘at’ them. The downside, however, is when you realise that they have communicated something visually (for example, ‘It was this big’) and you have missed it. • • • • • This table outlines some of the differences in the meaning and impact of eye contact between non-autistic and (many) autistic people. It always makes me shudder when I read of studies and training programs aimed at ‘teaching’ autistic children (or adults) to make eye contact. Yes, you can probably ‘teach’ autistic people to make eye contact—but you can probably also teach them to always stand on one leg while speaking, if that is something you think is important. But why teach people to do something completely unnatural that reduces their ability to communicate and their enjoyment of interactions? A better option might be to teach them ways to appear to make eye contact, thus making other people feel comfortable without making themselves feel uncomfortable. Many of us have learnt strategies to fake eye contact so that our conversation partner thinks we are looking at them but we do not experience escalating stress levels: look at the other person’s eyebrows or forehead look at their mouth or ear wear sunglasses if you wear vision-correction glasses, take them off so faces go blurry make intermittent (brief) eye contact. An even better option might be to raise people’s awareness that eye contact is neither natural nor necessary for many autistic people and that it can actually detract from our engagement in, and understanding of, conversations. Eye contact meaning and impact For a non-autistic person For an autistic person Conveys trust and honesty Has nothing to do with honesty or trustworthiness Is polite Is rude and intrusive Shows you are paying attention Makes it difficult to pay attention Establishes a connection with the person you are talking to Makes it difficult to establish a connection with the person you are talking to Improves your concentration Inhibits your concentration Projects confidence Makes you feel less confident Helps you understand the other person’s thoughts and feelings Makes it harder to understand the other person’s thoughts and feelings ‘If I am looking in your eyes, it means I am paying attention to what you are saying’ ‘If I am not looking in your eyes, it means I am paying attention to what you are saying’ Notes AJ Harbinger, ‘7 Things Everyone Should Know about the Power of Eye Contact’, Business Insider, 15 May 2015. Why Is Everyone So Mean? Bullying and Teasing Back when I was running a research centre, I had a wonderful group of staff who were all very committed to the work and to each other, and coming to the office was a pleasure. As the centre became more successful and we brought in increasing numbers of projects, it became evident that we needed to recruit another senior academic. After an extensive search, we identified someone who had the right background and was interested in the role. I had a niggling feeling that something wasn’t quite right, but her CV was impressive and we really needed to fill the role. What tipped the balance was when she told me that she was being poorly treated in her current role due to being a female in a male-dominated research group —a direct appeal to my sense of justice. When I checked with members of her current group and they suggested I exercise caution, I took it as evidence of her persecution. The first few months were great: she was smart and ambitious and it was terrific to have someone to bounce ideas around with. Then things started to change. At first it was very subtle and I thought I must be imagining it. When she spoke over me in meetings, I thought perhaps she was just nervous. When she came to meetings she hadn’t been invited to, I thought perhaps she was just being conscientious. Over the next few months it escalated. She not only invited herself to meetings but changed the dates and times (or emailed the attendees to ‘apologise’ for not attending, claiming that I had deliberately scheduled it at a time when she had family responsibilities). She replied to emails—cc’ing large numbers of people—criticising the way I ran meetings or conducted projects or wrote papers or managed staff. Then I discovered that my new recruit was cultivating relationships with my close colleagues, telling fanciful tales of things I had said about her or terrible things I had done to her. Soon it became evident that this person was creating friction among members of the team: telling one person that another had said something negative about them, taking credit for others’ work, intimidating and demeaning junior staff. It got to the stage that I dreaded going to work. I could do some things to support team members and protect them from her, but those things were limited to restructuring groups and reallocating tasks. There was even less I could do to protect myself. Each day there was a new drama—a staff member crying, a collaborator withdrawing from a project, a colleague suddenly unavailable to meet with me, another email critiquing my management. I became anxious, depressed, and withdrawn. I sought support from my direct manager, who was dismissive of my concerns and told me I should ‘go for a walk on the beach’. Apparently the concept that a manager could be bullied by a subordinate was not one to take seriously. It finally escalated to the point of an investigation, and the issue was ‘resolved’ by moving the person to a different unit. Over the next few months my team recovered from the trauma, but I still wake up at night thinking about what I could have done differently. Sadly, most autistic people will have stories to tell of being bullied, teased, tormented or manipulated. From the moment others notice that we are ‘different’, our differences make us targets, whether at school, at work or in personal relationships. For many of us, our lack of insight into the motives of others means we are often not aware that we are being targeted. My primary-school years were relatively ‘safe’ as the bullying was generally low-key, subtle, and fairly easy to ignore. Yes, the other kids called me a ‘nerd’ or a ‘teacher’s pet’, but I saw those labels as badges of honour rather than insults. No, the other kids didn’t want me to join in their games or sit with them at lunchtime, but I was much happier sitting in the library with a book and my imagination anyway. Secondary school was very different. The light-hearted ‘teasing’ became more serious and more intense. The increasing gap between my social skills and those of my peers became a source of entertainment for the ‘mean girls’. My misunderstanding of increasingly important social norms made my faux pas more visible and more cringeworthy. There was me—a teenage girl who enjoyed learning and doing well at school, didn’t follow fashion, didn’t read the same books or watch the same television programs as others, wasn’t interested in make-up and gossip, didn’t understand the subtle comments and innuendos—and there was everyone else. The biggest difference between primary-school bullying and secondary-school bullying was the latter’s intensity and invasiveness. In primary school, the bullies were in the playground and sometimes in the classroom (when the teacher wasn’t looking). In secondary school, they followed you to your locker or the bathroom, waited for you on the way home from school, wrote things in your books or on your desk.1 In primary school, I could usually work out why I was being bullied, because the rules were fairly simple and the insults were direct. In secondary school, it was like a badly designed guessing game: I would hear the whispers and wonder what social rule I had broken or who I had inadvertently offended by just being me. I still remember the day I was walking home from school and a group of the popular girls were waiting for me. My walk took me through the relatively secluded council gardens and then past the local shopping centre. The ‘cool’ kids normally hung out at the shopping centre, so when I saw them gathered around a picnic table I felt a rising sense of panic. In hindsight, I should probably have turned and run, but I assumed it was just going to be the usual comments about my hair or my clothes or the way I talk, followed by the usual gales of laughter. No, this time it was a bit more physical. The first punch took me by surprise; the rest seemed inevitable. After a couple of hits each they got bored, spat on me a few times, laughed and went on their way. I lay on the grass for a while, wondering what social misstep I had made to earn this retribution. Eventually a nice elderly woman walked by, helped me up, and took me to the police station. They called my mother, who took me home and did what she could to make me feel better. First thing the next day she called the school principal; the girls were reprimanded and the ringleaders given a short suspension. They didn’t physically attack me again, but they did continue to torment and bully me in more subtle ways. As a parent it was tough to watch my children go through similar experiences. One son in particular was targeted by social bullying, which is in many ways more painful than physical bullying. The most common and persistent experience was his classmates taking advantage of his empathy and naivety. I lost count of the number of times he came home without his school supplies because ‘One of the other kids didn’t have any pencils and they were really sad and asked me to give them mine’, or not having had any lunch because ‘Someone in my class needed my lunch money’. If these had been one-off occurrences I might have been as trusting as he was, but they were regular weekly —even daily—events. As his sense of social justice grew, his vulnerability to their manipulation actually increased. It wasn’t too long before the bullies discovered that if they claimed to have been victimised he would come to their rescue (‘That teacher was mean to me and made me cry—would you hit him for me?’). I could not wait to finish school—and nor could my sons—based on the conviction that the end of school would mean the end of bullying. I was sure that when I was an adult it would be different because adults were too busy living their grown-up lives to waste time tormenting and bullying others. I was wrong. The experience I related at the beginning of this chapter was just one of many that I have experienced as a ‘grown-up’. Bullying is not unique to any culture, social environment or neurotype, but there are several things about autistic people that make us particularly susceptible. We are ‘different’ in a society where sameness is valued and difference is frowned upon. We have different ways of communicating—we may be uncomfortable with eye contact, we may be direct or blunt, we tend to talk at great length about the things that interest us, we may not pick up on non-verbal cues, we may have difficulty making small talk, we might forget to say hello or goodbye. We have different rules and routines—we may not understand social norms, we might struggle with the ‘rules’ of conversation (taking turns, saying enough but not too much), we might need to do things in very specific ways and expect others to follow the same rules and processes. We have different interests—we may be passionately interested in things that are not seen as ‘normal’ for our age or situation, we may have very little interest in things that the group values (sport, gossip, reality TV). Perhaps most importantly, we may have difficulty discerning the motivations and manoeuvrings of others. Why did I not realise that the person I hired was going to cause me so much distress? Why did I not listen to the people who cautioned me? Why did I not see the signs when she first started undermining me? Why did I not take action to protect myself? The answer to all of those questions is that I come from a place where people are honest and logical and predictable. I don’t ‘play politics’ or try to advance my career/status at the expense of other people, so it doesn’t occur to me that other people will do this. I interpret their behaviour through the lens of my own, and am confounded when someone I have treated well treats me badly. Did I learn from that experience? I tried to. I assured myself that in future I would be more careful, more receptive to the early signs, less trusting and more cautious. Did it work? Yes, but only until the next time I found myself in a very similar situation. Notes I am eternally thankful that I grew up in a world without social media, because the bullies couldn’t follow me into my room at home. Who Are You? Facial Recognition I travel a lot for work, and I spend a lot of time in airport lounges. I am an anxious traveller. I am not afraid of flying, but I am anxious about the change in my routine and all the unexpected things that can happen; so when I am in the lounge I am either anxious about where I am going or exhausted from where I have been. Either way, my social energy reserves are low. One particular day I was sitting in an airport lounge in Sydney waiting for my flight and following my usual routine: identify a place to sit that doesn’t put you too close to someone else and where you can see the announcement screen; get a plate of carrots and celery; make a cup of peppermint tea;1 get out the laptop and start working. It was a very busy day in the lounge and the only spot I could find was at one of the long tables. Very soon after I sat down, the person in the next seat spoke to me: Person: What time is your flight? Me: Six forty-five. Expectant pause as the person looks at me, clearly expecting more. Me (following learnt social convention): What time is your flight? Person: Seven-ten. I’m off to Brisbane for a training session. Where are you headed? Me: Home. Person: Oh, that’s right, you live in Melbourne. Another expectant pause as the person looks at me; my brain is alternating between ‘How does this stranger know where I live?’ and scrambling for something to say. Me: That’s a nice keyboard cover you have on your laptop. Person: I bought it online. They come in a range of different colours. Me: I like that one. My favourite colour is pink. Person: I know. Another awkward silence as I ponder how a total stranger knows my favourite colour. Person: You don’t know who I am, do you? Me (deciding we are way too far into the conversation for me to pretend otherwise): No, sorry. I don’t. Person: I’m Olivia,2 from the North Sydney campus. Me: I’m sorry I didn’t recognise you … It’s been a long day … I was a bit distracted ... I have always struggled with recognising people’s faces, whether casual acquaintances or long-time friends and colleagues, especially when I see them out of their usual context. I envy those people who run across someone in the street and instantly recognise them from when they met in primary school. I don’t recognise my neighbours unless I see them in their house or yard, and I don’t recognise friends or colleagues if I see them in a different context than usual (for example, at a shopping centre) or in a different ‘container’ (for example, in casual clothes if they usually wear a suit). I remember going to the airport with my husband to pick up my parents when I hadn’t seen them for over a year. We waited at the gate with all the other families, watching the people come through from customs. As we scanned the crowd, I said, ‘Hey look, that guy over there is wearing one of those shirts that my dad always wears’—only to have my husband reply that this was because ‘that guy over there’ was my father. My struggle to recognise people adds considerably to my social anxiety in both informal and formal settings. I dread parties, networking events, company dinners, event nights: they feel like an exam I am destined to fail. My least favourite question is ‘Hi Sandra, have you met X?’ I look at the person standing next to them and my brain struggles between two equally problematic responses: ‘No, I haven’t’ (which will offend them if I have) and ‘Yes, I have’ (which will confuse them if I haven’t). I tend to go with the odds—after a lifetime of saying ‘No, I haven’t’ followed by the person responding at the same time with ‘Yes, we met at a conference last month/worked in the same unit for five years/live next door to each other’—and respond with a mumbled ‘Yes, we ...’ and hope for a clue in the ensuing conversation. Formal settings can be even worse. I have always dreaded formal meetings where I have to identify someone in a room (for example, ‘Professor X will meet you in the lunch room’), and large meetings where I know that I have met all the people in the room but when I look around I can’t figure out who is who. When heading off to a meeting—whether it’s with someone new or someone I have met many times—I do a Google Image search to refresh my memory of what the person looks like (I hate it when people don’t update their profile photos!). With larger group meetings—for example, teaching a class of students or attending a senior management meeting—I print off head shots with names and put them in the front of my meeting folder so I can discreetly check. I know it hurts people’s feelings when I don’t recognise them, and that people often think I am rude or unfriendly, particularly when they smile or wave across a room and I ‘ignore’ them. I don’t mean to offend, and for most of my life have regarded my struggle to recognise faces as just one more of my failings as a human being (maybe if I just tried harder ...). The light-bulb moment came for me when I went to an appointment with my psychologist (probably about the twentieth session we’d had). I walked into the clinic and up to the reception desk and then, after the usual greetings (‘Hello, how are you?’ ‘I’m fine, thanks. How are you?’), said, ‘I’m here to see Laura.’ The person behind the desk said, ‘Hi Sandra, I’m Laura.’ I was mortified. Here was the person I had shared my deepest thoughts and feelings with, who had helped me so much with making sense of my life, and I didn’t recognise her. I wished the ground would open up and swallow me, but Laura didn’t bat an eyelid—she just commented that lots of autistic people have trouble with face recognition and it wasn’t unusual for me not to recognise her out of context (that is, behind the reception desk instead of in her office). Now that I have learnt more about face blindness (prosopagnosia) and how common it is among autistic people, I have begun to accept that it is not evidence of my failure as a human being or something that I can ‘fix’ by trying harder. As a result, I have started being a lot more candid with people about my challenges with facial recognition. I have explained to my close colleagues and staff why I may not recognise them if I see them outside of the office. When I realise at a function that the person talking to me believes we know each other, I mention my face blindness and ask for their name; once I know who they are, I can usually remember our previous conversations. When I meet people for the first time and I know it is likely that I will meet them again and potentially offend them if I reintroduce myself, I try to find an opportunity to drop into the conversation that I have trouble with faces.3 I still have those embarrassing moments, but they are less common than they used to be. I realised the value of this candour a few weeks ago when I ran into one of my team in the cafeteria; she correctly interpreted the blank look on my face and said, ‘Hi Sandra, it’s Eleanor.’ I also find it virtually impossible to describe people, even people I know extremely well. My descriptions tend to focus on stand-out features that are salient to me. I have constant anxiety when I am out about losing the person I am with and being asked to describe them. If I lost my husband in a store, the conversation would probably go a bit like this: Helpful person: What does he look like? Me: He is tall, exactly one foot taller than me. Helpful person: What colour is his hair? Me: Um, kind of black, I think, or maybe brown. Helpful person: What colour are his eyes? Me: I’m not sure what colour, but he has very kind eyes. Helpful person: Does he have any tattoos, scars or distinguishing features? Me: I don’t think so. I am sure he doesn’t have a tattoo, because he doesn’t like tattoos. He has this cute hair thing because he is kind of balding but he has hair at the front and if it grew really long it would look like a horn. To be clear, I love my husband very much. He makes me feel safe and happy and relaxed and I couldn’t imagine my life without him. Just don’t ask me to describe him.4 Notes I would have actually preferred to have black tea with milk, but they keep the lactose-free milk at the bar so you have to interact with people to get it. Name changed to protect the offended. I don’t do this with every person I meet, just those for whom I know it will be disastrous for the relationship when I don’t recognise them. I don’t find it much easier to describe myself. I am 5 feet 3 inches (160 centimetres) and have pink hair. After that, I get stuck. Please Go Away: The Need for People-free Time For several years I did some work with an organisation in Canada. Most of it was done by email or videoconference, but there was also an annual visit to run workshops. The first year I went it was gruelling—not the workshops themselves (I can talk for days on things I am interested in), but all the things the organisers did to make me feel ‘welcome’. There were morning teas, lunches and group dinners, and they had established a roster of people to entertain me: it was as if they felt that leaving me alone for more than fifteen minutes would be rude. By the end of each day I was exhausted, desperately craving some alone time in my hotel room. To be clear, they were lovely people but there were so many of them and so very, very many hours of conversations. When I was preparing for my second visit, one of the people I had met the first time—a lovely woman who shared my sense of humour and love of books—suggested that I could stay at her home rather than in a hotel. I was panic-stricken. I knew there was no way I could stay with her, in her home, with no possibility of isolation. I also knew that to tell her I would rather stay in a hotel would really offend her. What to do? I tried all kinds of excuses, and she had a solution for each one. Finally, I settled on ‘an obscure and embarrassing medical condition that means I can’t share a bathroom with anyone’. I have no idea what she thought the condition was, but she accepted it (probably because she was too polite to ask more questions), and with great relief I confirmed my hotel booking. Social interaction—even the most enjoyable social interaction—takes energy. The amount of energy it takes is influenced by a range of factors, including both ‘social’ and ‘environmental’ factors. Social factors include things like who I am interacting with, how many of them there are, how long the interaction lasts, how (un)structured and how (un)predictable the interaction is, and how much I feel I need to mask my autism. Environmental factors include things like where the interaction is, how familiar I am with the environment, how bright/loud/smelly it is, and how many distractions there are. The number and duration of interactions, and the amount of ‘recovery’ time between them, also have an impact on the amount of energy I need to get through the day. Once my ‘social battery’ runs out, I need to recharge it by spending time away from other people. Many years of perceiving my heightened exhaustion to be an indication of my failure to be a ‘good person’, rather than realising this is a normal part of autism, means that I have trained myself to keep going after my battery runs out. I do this by using my ‘reserve power’, which is energy I need to think, eat, stay calm and stay healthy. I would love to be the kind of person who comes home from work, bounds through the door, hugs my husband and kids, takes the dog for a run around the block, stops to say hi to the neighbours, and calls my sister to catch up on her day. I am not that person. I stumble through the door at the end of the day and need to spend time in total quiet and solitude while I recharge my battery. Fortunately, I have two sons who need as much alone time as I do, and a husband who accepts this as normal. A great example of how well my husband understands me is our annual ‘vacation’ for many years after we married. Each January we would arrange for me to travel to Melbourne for a few days, ostensibly to shop the sales. I did, in fact, do some shopping, but what I mostly did was stay in my hotel room. For three or four days I sat there, enjoying the absence of people. I ate when (and what) I felt like eating, slept when I felt like sleeping, spun and sang and bounced, and soaked up the silence. It is hard to describe the magic of having those three or four days of knowing that I did not have to see or speak to another human being or be anyone other than myself. This is also a great example of how other people don’t understand me. It didn’t take long for me to realise that when people ask, ‘What did your husband get you for Christmas?’ and you respond with ‘Four days in a hotel by myself ’ they don’t realise that this is a wonderful, thoughtful gift. Rather, they look concerned and start asking if everything is OK with your relationship. One of the positive things about ‘growing in to autism’ is the realisation that when my body says it has had enough, I need to listen. Decades of headaches, stomach-aches, viral infections, depression and exhaustion could have been avoided if I had realised that no amount of ‘trying’ was going to change the ability of my brain and body to process input. Increasingly, when I am making decisions about whether to accept an invitation or agree to an activity, I look at my calendar and work out in my head how much social energy I am going to use up during the rest of the day. If I have a morning full of meetings, I will try to block out the afternoon to work quietly in my office. If I have a week full of meetings, I won’t make plans for the weekend that involve social interaction. I am also gentler on myself and (at least try to) feel less guilty about declining invitations. Our home has a somewhat unusual set-up but one that works really well for us as a family. Each of us has a section of the house (a bedroom, a bathroom and a living space) that is ‘ours’, where we can be alone, do the things that make us feel calm and happy, and not be distracted by each other’s presence. In the middle of the house is our family hub—kitchen, dining room, lounge room—where we spend time together enjoying each other’s company. It might seem strange to other people that we have more living rooms than bedrooms, but it works well for us. During the COVID-19 Melbourne lockdowns I found I wasn’t using up my energy every day with all the usual social interactions. I spent the workday in my living room working on my computer and attending online meetings. At the end of the day, I dimmed the lights and spent an hour doing a jigsaw puzzle or reading a book, then I went through into the shared space and spent the evening with my family. My mother-in-law regularly spends Christmas with us. This started when she was first widowed, and has continued since then. I love my mother-inlaw but have always found her Christmas visits really stressful. For me, the simple physical presence of another person in our house means the mask stays on: I need to continue to hide my stims, I need to make conversation, I need to remember and follow the social norms of interacting with a house guest. My husband always says that I should just continue as normal and not feel obliged to communicate when my batteries are flat, but years of following social rules has taught me that guests must be ‘entertained’ and can’t be left to get bored. Then one year my husband explained to his mother that I need space and solitude. Much to my surprise she wasn’t offended: she was understanding and supportive. It was absolutely fine with her for me to stay in my room for the day or to go into the city during the week so I didn’t have the combined energy expenditure of work and a house guest. It can be hard to explain to non-autistic people why every hour of ‘people time’ needs to be balanced by an hour (or more) of ‘alone time’. Apparently, most people are energised by talking to a family member on the phone, having coffee with a workmate or going out for dinner with friends. This means that my reluctance to do such things can be seen as a lack of care or connection. When I decline an invitation to eat out with old friends or go weeks or even months without calling my extended family, it is not because I don’t care about them. It is because I don’t have the energy to mask (follow the social conventions, interpret tone of voice and body language, keep my ‘I am listening’ look on, hold in my stims ...). • • • • • • I think a lot of autistic people could have much better social connections if non-autistic people really understood these limitations, didn’t take them personally, and supported us to interact on our own terms—but also if we were brave enough, and had the right words, to tell other people what we need. I can say to my husband, ‘I just need to sit in the living room by myself for a couple of hours’ or ‘I don’t have the energy to talk to you on the phone right now’. If he says he is going shopping and asks if I want to come, I can say ‘No thanks’ without offending him. My relationship with my two sons is the same, unless one of us is talking about our special interest, in which case we are oblivious to the other’s need for escape. Unfortunately, most relationships are not like that. If someone invites you for dinner and by the time the main course arrives you are running on reserve energy, social etiquette prevents you from making an early exit. If someone calls you on the phone, they expect you to talk to them. This combination of social energy (I need to be entertaining and informative) and uncertainty (What do they want? How long will the phone call last?) means the ringing of the phone is anxiety-inducing no matter who is on the other end. There are exceptions. I have a mentee whom I talk to on the phone once a month who is also autistic. I don’t find our conversations stressful because we have an agreed format that we both adhere to. We make a time for the call, she calls at exactly that time, we establish what we are going to talk about, we accept that we will both have moments of silence, and we end the conversation at the agreed time. If you are a non-autistic person and you want to increase your interaction with an autistic friend or family member, here are some things you can do: Rather than calling them, send a text to make a time to talk. Tell them that you will keep phone calls to ten minutes (and stick to it). Accept that if they suggest a different time for a chat or a catch-up, it means their battery is flat, not that they don’t like you. Rather than inviting them over for an unspecified time, invite them for something with time parameters. Regardless of the duration of the event, let them know that it is totally fine to leave early if they are feeling drained (and mean it). Think about what you could do to reduce other inputs that might drain their energy. Choose a quiet location for lunch, or turn the lights down if they come for dinner. Don’t Touch My Things: Autism and Object Attachment When I was a little girl, I had a teddy bear that I loved. He was very old and tatty and his growl had long since stopped working. My family named him Fred (short for ‘Fred Bear the Threadbare Ted Bear’). He wore a pair of overalls, a floral shirt and leather buckle-up shoes. I still remember the day I discovered he was missing: I came home from school and I couldn’t find him. There were several theories about how and why he disappeared, with the frontrunner being that my younger brother had ‘borrowed’ him and accidentally left him in the park (there is no evidence that he actually did this). We never solved the mystery of what happened to Fred, and we never found him. My family reassured me that this was unfortunate but not of great significance, as I was by that stage ‘far too old’ for a teddy bear. For me, it was catastrophic. Fred was my bear, and he was gone. I kept looking for him and am still looking to this day. I regularly check the toy section in op shops and markets, and every time I see old teddy bears listed for sale on eBay or Facebook or a local marketplace I carefully examine the photos just in case Fred is there.1 I have a very strong sense of attachment to objects. If it is mine, then I would rather you didn’t touch it and I will get very anxious if you do. Equally, if it is yours, I won’t touch it even if you say I can. If it is mine and it gets damaged or broken, I will be devastated. If it is yours and it gets damaged or broken, I will be heartbroken for you, and if I am the one who damaged it, I will carry the guilt with me for decades. This has always been the case. As a child, I did not like other kids to touch my toys, I got very upset when my sister ‘tidied’ my room for me, and I felt violated if someone opened my bedroom drawers or looked in my schoolbag. As a teenager, I did not understand how other girls could find it enjoyable to swap clothes or share lipstick with their friends.2 For a long time, I interpreted this as an indication that I am not a good person—consistent with the prevailing social norm that nice people share and nasty people don’t—and lived with the conviction that I had an inner core of nastiness and selfishness. It’s not that I am a miser or that I don’t want to make other people happy. I am happy to donate goods, money and time to charity. I will happily give things to those in need or those who covet them. If you like my bag or hairclip or sandwich, I will happily go and buy you one, but I won’t offer to give you mine. Both of my sons share this strong sense of ownership. They do not like other people to go into their rooms or touch their things. My younger son collects Transformers. He has hundreds of them, some in boxes, some on shelves, some in the process of being modified into new creations. He will happily show his collection to anyone and spend hours explaining the characters and storylines. But if anyone touches one of his Transformers, I can see the anxiety rising in him; I can see him twitching as he wrestles internally to reconcile his need to tell them to stop touching with his awareness that he is meant to be ‘polite’. I totally empathise with him. If someone is coming to our house, particularly if they are bringing a young person, I make sure they understand that it is OK to look but not to touch unless my son expressly gives permission. My husband is the polar opposite. If his phone rings while he is out of the room, I will inform him when he returns that he missed a call. I will not answer his phone or even look at the screen to see who is calling, no matter how many times he assures me that this is the ‘normal’ thing to do. My brain says it is his phone, therefore no one else should touch it. If mail arrives at the house addressed to my husband, it can stay unopened for months. He tends to put it down, forget about it, and assume that if it is important I will open it. He sees it as ‘our’ mail and tells me I should open it as I am the organised one, but my brain says it is addressed to him and only he may open it. One day—after reflecting on the fact that my sons and I (all autistic) shared a bond with our possessions that was alien to my husband (not autistic)—I googled ‘object attachment and autism’. There it was in black and white. We are not selfish! We are normal autistic people who need these objects to stay exactly how and where they are so we can have some stability in our often chaotic and confusing world. I am sure that most people, regardless of their neurotype, have objects they are attached to and feel uncomfortable if someone else touches them. However, for many autistic people it goes far beyond a sense of irritation and becomes a crippling anxiety. My son doesn’t want people to touch his Transformers because if they are moved, adjusted or damaged, his ‘safe’ comfort objects become unpredictable. I don’t want people to touch my dolls or books because the sense of happiness and calm I experience seeing them exactly how and where I left them helps me cope with all the things in my life that I can’t control. It might seem illogical that the armchair on the left in the lounge room is ‘my chair’ and that I feel extremely anxious if someone else sits in it. It might seem illogical that the pink coffee cup is ‘my cup’ and I feel deeply betrayed if someone else makes their drink in it. It might seem illogical that I was despondent for weeks when my husband gave away a little white cupboard of mine that a friend really wanted because it matched her furniture and I wasn’t using it for anything. That is, it might seem illogical to other people. But to me, ‘my chair’ and ‘my mug’ and ‘my cupboard’ are anchors—little pieces of stability that make me feel safe and provide some predictability in a world that often doesn’t make sense. When my mother-in-law comes to visit, my biggest source of stress is that she likes to ‘do things’ while she is here; she has an unstoppable need to be active and to be doing something useful. Typically, this means reorganising cupboards (or whole rooms), sorting things, cleaning things, moving things. I find this immensely challenging. My anxiety goes through the roof and we end up arguing. Before her most recent annual Christmas visit, I had a session with my psychologist and we talked about how much this upsets me and how I could handle it better. She pointed out that as my object attachment and fear of change are common and normal aspects of my autism, it is unlikely that I can do much to modify my reactions. I hit on the plan of having a list of things for my mother-in-law to do that needed doing but didn’t involve touching any of my prized possessions. I shared this idea with my husband, who nodded sagely and then asked, ‘But what about day three, when she has already finished everything on the list?’ He had a point. So, with some trepidation, I wrote a letter to my mother-in-law. I explained that my anxiety about people touching or moving my things is an inherent part of who I am and not something I can change, that I appreciate her good intentions and want her to feel welcome but I need to be able to set boundaries about places and things she can’t touch. Then I outlined the ‘no go’ zones (my bedroom, my bathroom, the top living room, the doll and craft storage room). What a change! There was no stress, no tension, no arguments. She kept herself busy organising rooms, redoing the garden, bringing order to the lounge room. I knew that I could go out and come back and ‘my spaces’ would be untouched, and that I could go and sit in any of those places if I wanted to be alone. My only regret was that I hadn’t been brave enough to tell her how I felt decades earlier. Having the words to explain why we feel the way we do and knowing that these reactions are both normal and functional can be enormously helpful in understanding ourselves and explaining ourselves to others. I now know that I am not a selfish person and that other people’s descriptions of me as compassionate and generous are correct. Like my sons, I will happily donate my time, money and resources, but I will continue to cling to those objects that make me feel safe and secure in the world. Notes I know this is illogical: I now live on the opposite side of the country to where I had Fred, and forty-five years later a bear that old has probably disintegrated to dust anyway. Quite apart from the (to me) obvious infection risk of sharing make-up. Part 4 Life Stages and Relationships A Fish Out of Water: The Dating Game My first ‘romance’ was when I was about fourteen years old. My older sister was a bit of a party person at the time and one weekend when my parents were away she invited a group of friends over. This was also my first experience drinking alcohol (but that’s another story). I hung out on the edge of the party, not wanting to ‘miss out’ but not knowing how to engage. One of the boys—I will call him Dave—came over and started talking to me. I was really flattered that he was focusing on me, even though I was two years younger than everyone else. Before long we were kissing—my first kiss! My memories of the rest of the night are pretty vague, although I do remember being violently ill. My autistic logic was that boy meets girl, boy kisses girl, and boy and girl live happily ever after. In my mind, Dave was now my boyfriend. We went to the same high school, so this was exactly how I understood relationships were meant to work. Each lunchtime I would head over to the place he hung out with his friends and spend the lunchbreak thinking how cool I was to have a boyfriend. One of the other things about autistic people is that we like scripts. So each day when I arrived I would march up to him with the greeting: ‘Aren’t you glad to see me?’ I am cringing as I write this because in retrospect I realise how weird I must have seemed to him and his friends, but at the time I was still following the ‘boy meets girl …’ logic. This went on for several weeks. Looking back, he must have been an unusually kind sixteen-year-old boy to put up with it for as long as he did (either that, or he and his friends found it amusing until the novelty wore off). Anyway, finally the day came when I arrived with my customary ‘Aren’t you glad to see me?’ and Dave clearly explained to me that actually, no, he wasn’t glad at all and he would be much happier to never see me again. I was shattered. My first boyfriend, and here I was being unceremoniously dumped after only a few weeks. If social relationships are tricky for autistic people, then romantic relationships are like walking through a minefield in size 13 boots with your eyes closed. In this chapter I share some excruciating examples of relationship experiences I have had—not because I want to embarrass myself, but because if you are loving or supporting an autistic person it is important to understand the predicaments our lack of awareness of social cues can lead us into. I was shy, geeky and socially awkward as a teenager. I didn’t have close female friends whom I could go to for relationship advice, so I learnt the ‘rules’ of dating from reading Jane Austen books and watching family-friendly television shows. As I progressed through my teen and adult years I had my heart ‘broken’ several times and apparently I broke a couple of hearts myself. My lack of insight into the motives and thoughts of others, combined with my inability to read subtle cues and body language, has resulted in some serious misunderstandings and conflict. When I made a new friend at work and she introduced me to her family, we all got along very well. I was living by myself at the time and would often stay at their house on the weekend, joining them for breakfast and feeling like I was part of the family. When I met a really nice man (who later became my husband), I was sure they would be happy for me. Then one day, completely out of the blue, my friend’s husband called me in a very emotional state. He told me that he loved me and that my new relationship was breaking his heart. I was stunned; I could not understand how he could have thoughts like that. He was angry; he couldn’t believe that I had no idea how he felt. He kept repeating that I must know because it was ‘obvious’ in the way that he looked at me and spoke to me. I won’t go into detail about the emotional mess that followed, but at the end of it all my friendship with both of them was destroyed. Sadly, this was not the only time that someone I saw as a friend, colleague or collaborator has seen our relationship in a different way. I am not suggesting this is unique to autistic people: unrequited love is a common enough theme in movies and songs that I realise it happens to everyone. The difference is that my inability to read non-verbal communication or to have insight into the thoughts of other people means that I often do not see what I later discover was obvious to other people. Have you seen the movie Runaway Bride? If you haven’t, I highly recommend it as a great representation of how many autistic people adapt to be the person others want them to be. Don’t focus too much on the plot—just focus on Maggie’s character and the way she metamorphoses in each relationship. She changes her clothes, her interests, and even the way she likes her eggs cooked, morphing into the ‘perfect girlfriend’ for each different partner. That movie really struck a chord with me. When I look back on my relationship history, I underwent a similar process in each relationship as I tried to be the person my partner wanted me to be. ‘Girlfriend’, like ‘daughter’ and ‘friend’, were roles to be learnt, with clear expectations of what I was meant to look like and how I was meant to act. So, in each relationship I became the person my partner wanted me to be. I didn’t realise it at the time, but looking back I can see that in each relationship I changed the way I dressed, the way I spoke, the interests and hobbies I had, and even my life goals. Some of those relationships lasted for months and others for years, but in the end they all fell apart. As we all know, masking is exhausting and eventually the mask slips. When that happens, either our partner realises that we aren’t the person they want us to be or we decide we don’t have the energy to keep being that person. At the end of each relationship, I found myself even more confused about my identity. For me and for many autistic women, relationships are the ultimate masking experience. We know that we need to hide the parts of us that annoy or frustrate our partner, and that we need to be ‘better’ at being who they want us to be. It’s one of the things that makes many of us vulnerable to domestic violence and other forms of relationship abuse. When a partner tells us that we aren’t good enough we believe them, because most of our lives we have told ourselves the same thing. At the end of the movie, Maggie moves to New York to live by herself and discovers her own interests and style (including how she likes her eggs). I did not have the same lightning moment, perhaps because, unlike Maggie but like so many other autistic people, I wasn’t only masking who I was in romantic relationships, I was also hiding my real self at work, with friends, with family, and even from myself. Eventually, after a number of failed relationships, I decided it was all too complicated and I was much better off staying single. Then I met the man who became my husband. Our relationship began in much the same way as others I’d had. I figured out who I was meant to be and played that role for quite a while. As in all of the other situations in which my mask is on, this was physically and emotionally draining. After a while—just like in my previous relationships—my mask started to slip. I became less eager to please and more confrontational; I declined invitations to events I didn’t want to go to; I stopped listening to music and watching movies that he chose unless I actually liked them. We had a few rocky patches but came through them still enjoying each other’s company. He is still much the same person he was when we met, albeit a little bit more conservative and restrained. Over time, as I have come to be aware of and accept my autistic self, I have continued to morph into the ‘real me’. I think I am a very different person from when we met, but my husband seems to think that what has changed is surface stuff that doesn’t matter too much. I don’t know whether this is because he has a wide tolerance for change or because I let him see much more of myself from the beginning than I realised. If you are an autistic person, you have probably had (or probably will have) your share of failed relationships. My advice is not to buy into the myth that you need to be ‘better’ or ‘different’ to find and keep a meaningful relationship. What you need to do is to be yourself and to be comfortable with yourself. If you find someone who realises how awesome you are, that is terrific. If you don’t, it is better to be the single but genuine you than the partnered replica of someone else. Friends, Families, and Feelings One day, many years ago, I received a phone call from my son’s school. School person: I am calling to have a chat about [son]. Me (wary): What about [son]? School person: We have noticed that he doesn’t tend to play with the other children at lunchtime ... Me: That would be because he spends the time in the library. School person: Yes, that’s right. Me: So ... School person: So, I had a chat to him today and suggested that he invite one of the other boys over to play after school ... Me: Hmmmm ... School person: And what he said worried me. Me: What did he say? School person: He said, ‘You have to be kidding. I have to spend all day with those other kids, and now you want me to take one home with me.’ Me: Well, that sounds pretty reasonable. I can’t imagine wanting to spend time after work with any of my colleagues. School person: Oh ... Expert wisdom tells us that having a strong social network is essential to our wellbeing. Numerous research studies show that regular social interaction improves our mental and physical health. Statistical analyses show that the people with the most social ties live significantly longer than those with the least social ties. I don’t question the validity of this research, but I do question the way it applies to us autistic folk. It is the ‘quantity’ aspect I struggle with. Social interaction takes energy—lots of energy! The idea of having as many friends as my husband has sounds like a nightmare to me. It seems as though every time I walk into the room he is on the phone to someone, happily chatting away about whatever it is that connects them. I tend to plan my social interactions: today I will call my sister, next week I will call my mum, the week after that I will call my friend.1 The ‘quality’ aspect makes more sense to me. My husband has friends that he has had since childhood. He maintains regular contact with them even if they have moved interstate or overseas or their lives have taken very different trajectories. I can’t even remember the names of the people I went to school with. In addition to those lifelong friends, he has lots of ‘shared interest’ friends. Self-help books tell us that the best way to make friends is through shared interests. That makes more sense to me as an autistic person: shared interests mean you have something to talk about and there is less need for the torturous aspects of small talk. My younger son inhabits a world where everyone he knows is his friend, and everyone he doesn’t know yet is a potential friend. He approaches social interactions with confidence and enthusiasm. Unlike me, he anticipates a positive outcome from almost every social interaction. Sometimes I worry that he is too trusting and could get hurt by unkind people, but mostly I admire his confidence and the accuracy of his expectations. The reality is that he assumes everyone he meets will like him because experience has shown that this is the case. He has a lovely, engaging exterior and everyone who meets him wants to be his friend. I am very different. I do not assume that people will like me. I do not necessarily assume that they will actively dislike me, but I do not expect them to gravitate towards me in the way that people gravitate towards my son. Rather, I expect that they will either not notice my existence or not find me of sufficient interest to expend energy on forming an opinion about me. I base this expectation on a number of factors. First, I am a bit weird—I fidget, I stim, I make noises. Second, I am socially awkward—I struggle with eye contact, small talk, following the social rules. Third, I am not particularly interesting unless you happen to share one of my special interests. A lifetime of being me has demonstrated the accuracy of these self-perceptions. I made few friends at school and fewer at university; I was bullied and teased by peers; I was constantly reminded by teachers that I needed to talk less about what I was interested in; and it wasn’t unusual to hear myself described by others as ‘weird’ or ‘intimidating’. I also have objective evidence from a conversation I had many years ago with someone who had known me and my siblings since we were children. I asked—in my usual blunt manner—why this person did not like me. The response I received was that my sisters had a ‘presence’ that made them engaging and fun to be around, and that I was definitely the most intelligent of the three of us but that I didn’t have the ‘personality’ they had. It was not that this person saw anything in me that they actively disliked: they just didn’t see anything that they actively liked.2 As I am not a particularly social person and am quite comfortable with my own thoughts, I did not go down the rabbit hole of feeling that I needed to create something about myself for people to like. Rather, I accepted that people would not seek out my company unless there was some objective benefit in doing so. If I wanted a friend, I just needed to find someone who was far more in need of a friend than I was and, as long as I could add value to their life, it would be a meaningful relationship. Sometimes this worked really well for me: I met some lovely people and provided them with what they needed at the time. Sometimes it didn’t work so well—either they left when I was unable to give what they needed, or they took things I couldn’t afford to give (like my money or my safety).3 Much to my surprise, over the years I have developed some strong friendships that are based on the exchange of nothing other than mutual regard or respect. As you might expect, they have generally come from work (because I don’t do much other than work and then recover at home) and have typically commenced from my understanding of what I had to ‘give’ to the person to compensate for the lack of intrinsic value in my offer of friendship. However, once I no longer have a valuable asset to offer (for example, my skills or my time), the relationship has somehow continued and I have had to conclude that those people actually like me for me. Wow! My closest friend for more than a decade was someone who was originally my boss, then my mentor.4 Over time, our relationship evolved into the deepest friendship I have ever had outside of my family. I could talk to him about anything. Somehow, he managed to make me feel totally accepted for who I was but at the same time he could explain to me when I needed to act or speak differently around other people. When he and his family moved from Wollongong to Melbourne for work it seemed natural that my family and I would follow, and we did. He was there for all of our lows and all of our highs, from my crushing bouts of anxiety and depression to my career successes and those of my husband and children. Currently I have a very good friend at work who lives in another state and works at one of our other campuses. We met at a work event and bonded over some shared challenges. We got along really well and began to catch up regularly when I was in his town for work, usually going for a coffee or a drink at a nearby venue. We had a few unsuccessful attempts at getting the four of us together (him and his wife, me and my husband) when he was in Melbourne, but various travel glitches got in the way. Then they invited me to dinner at their house. I discussed this conundrum with my husband. There were lots of positives to accepting the invitation (not least getting to spend time with their gorgeous baby girl) but one big challenge: what would I talk about? Usually when he and I met we talked about work or about things related to work. I knew enough about social etiquette to know that work was not an appropriate dinner topic,5 but what did that leave? My husband to the rescue and I happily went to dinner armed with my list of ‘interesting topics’ to talk about. I actually had a lovely evening and have been invited back several times, partly because I was well prepared and partly because his wife was so welcoming and understanding. I share this story because I think it is important for neurotypical people to know that it is not that autistic people don’t like people or don’t want to have friends: for many of us it is just that the process of making (and keeping) friends is not instinctive and sometimes we need a bit of guidance and understanding. Once autistic people have made friends with someone, we tend to be very loyal. We don’t have fleeting friendships, we don’t abandon friendships (whether they are positive or destructive), and we don’t readily accept criticism of our friends. For any autistic people who are reading this, particularly if you are young or recently diagnosed, please don’t fall into the trap that I fell into. Many times in my life—and I have seen this repeated in my sons’ lives—I have had ‘friends’ or ‘partners’ who have used my self-doubt and my differences as weapons to keep me in destructive relationships. Please don’t take on board all the negative feedback (from yourself and from others) and the stereotypes of autism and devalue yourself as a human being. Don’t enter into destructive relationships that involve giving away parts of yourself to ‘earn’ someone’s regard. We might not have lots of friends and we might have to look for a long time and in a lot of places to find friends, but there are people out there who will actually like us exactly as we are and who will value and respect both our strengths and our quirks. Also, don’t feel pressured to have lots of friends because that is what ‘other people’ think you need. For some of us, one or two true friends is enough for a fulfilling social life, and more than that can be socially exhausting. If you are a parent of an autistic person, don’t buy into the view that you have to create friendships for your child.6 In most cases, your child would much rather have one or two friends who accept them for who they are than a dozen friends who make them feel that the relationship is contingent on them giving everything they have or being someone else. Notes When my older son read this he pointed out that it is often less frequent than that, especially when I have a lot of social interactions at work. This is not presented as a criticism of that person. I asked for and was given an honest answer. It also helped me focus less on trying to identify what it was about me that repelled people. See Chapter 17 for more about this. I plan to write a book about autism and work, and in that I will explain the profound impact he had on my career. My decade-long best friend taught me that. Unless they have clearly and explicitly communicated to you that they are lonely and want help making friends. With Great Challenge Comes Great Reward: Parenthood I was always very nervous of babies because they seemed so fragile and at the same time unpredictable. I am the youngest of the three girls in my family, so I was fortunate to be an aunt for quite a few years before I became a mum. My oldest sister was the first to have a baby (as I had expected) and she had a girl (as I had expected). Once my niece reached the age that she could hold her head up by herself and the risk of ‘breaking’ her was remote, I was delighted. I thought it was pretty cool to have this cute little thing to buy presents for and to play with. I remember the first time my sister left me in charge of the baby while she went out. It’s important to remember here that I was about eighteen years old at the time. My sister was leaving her baby with a very capable adult who had earned her pocket money as a teenager babysitting for friends (albeit children who were walking and talking). Before my sister left she explained to me that the baby needed to be fed when she woke up at six o’clock. I had to give her a bottle of milk which was already prepared—I just had to warm it up following the instructions. After the milk, I was to feed her a jar of baby food. Pretty simple, huh? The baby woke up on time, so we got off to a good start. I warmed up her bottle and she drank it without any problems. Then I got the baby food. It was a blackcurrant jelly, a lovely deep purple colour. Baby happily chomped through about half of the container as I carefully fed her one teaspoonful at a time. But then she lost interest and started turning away and looking around the room. I became a bit anxious. My sister had left me in charge, with some really simple instructions to follow, and I didn’t want her to come home and find that I hadn’t stuck to the plan. Clearly, the solution was to keep providing teaspoonfuls of purple jelly, popping them in the baby’s mouth each time she opened it. She dribbled or spat some out, but most of it went down just as planned. Then all of a sudden, out of nowhere, she started to vomit. It was like a small purple volcano. I looked at the quantity of food coming out and I was absolutely certain that she must be vomiting up her internal organs: there was no way that little jar of jelly could go that far. I was absolutely beside myself. I kept thinking, ‘Oh no, I’ve killed her! My sister will never forgive me. I will never forgive myself.’ I cleaned the vomit off the baby and the surrounding area, the whole time holding on to her so I could be sure she was still breathing. I sang to her, I talked to her, I walked around the room with her, being careful not to bounce or jiggle her too much. After what seemed like forever but was probably more like thirty minutes, my sister came home. The baby was still breathing, which was a good sign! Bravely, I confessed that I had caused serious and permanent injury to my beautiful niece. My sister and brother-in-law burst into gales of laughter. They explained that babies vomit all the time and it looks a lot more serious than it is. More importantly, they explained that the instruction to feed the baby the bottle of milk and a jar of baby food was not actually meant to be taken literally. The subtext, which I was completely oblivious to, was ‘Feed the baby the jar of baby food, but stop if she doesn’t want to eat anymore because it probably means she’s full.’ Now that seems really obvious. Remembering that I was an intelligent and capable adult at the time, you might wonder why it wasn’t obvious to me. I entered parenthood thinking it would be easy. I was about to do something that women across the globe and throughout history did and had done every day. I reasoned that with my inherent skills and intelligence, supported by my copious research, I would be a terrific mother. I planned to take the generous twelve-month (unpaid) maternity leave that my employer offered, and to return to work expertly juggling career and motherhood just like women do in books and the movies. When my son was born, I was immediately smitten. He was perfect. Then I took him home. I had prepared thoroughly for this momentous day: I had read books, scanned journal articles for the latest research, and written myself copious notes. I mapped out feeding schedules (babies need to be fed every four hours) and sleeping schedules (babies sleep a lot, and that meant I would have plenty of time to get the chores done). The problem was that the baby hadn’t read the books and done the research. He seemed oblivious to all the rules. He didn’t understand that he needed to eat four-hourly: I would feed him and two hours later he would be screaming for more food. He didn’t understand that he was supposed to sleep while I was doing chores or having a nap. He was so loud, and so smelly, and so totally, completely overwhelming. This was my baby and he was perfect, which left only one logical explanation: none of it was working out right because I wasn’t good enough as a mother. Other mums knew how to distinguish an ‘I’m hungry’ cry from an ‘I’m in pain’ cry. Other mums knew how to rock their baby to sleep. Other mums instinctively knew when their baby needed a nappy change. I needed to try harder. I read more books. I watched more videos. I tried every parenting tip and training manual I could find. My baby still cried. Some days my mum would come over and pick up my screaming bundle of fury and he would whimper and settle—more conclusive proof that I was a failure at something that every other woman on the planet could do with ease. Not long before his first birthday, I discovered that I was pregnant again. Yes, here comes another baby who doesn’t know the rules! ‘You can’t get pregnant while you are breastfeeding,’ that rule said. My younger son was born seventeen months after his brother. He was also perfect. I took him home. He was much quieter than the first one—too quiet, I thought. He hardly ever cried, even when the books said he must be hungry. He hardly ever slept, either, but he seemed to be happy enough and would lie in his cot smiling at the ceiling. My babies grew to be toddlers and then preschoolers. I kept trying to be the perfect mum. No prepackaged baby food for my children: I would spend hours peeling, cooking, pureeing and freezing fruit and vegetables to keep my sons safe from pesticides and contaminants. I measured the babies, weighed them, tracked all their milestones, took them for their check-ups ... From the outside looking in, it probably seemed like a pretty normal family scenario, but the reality was that I was not coping. I became more and more depressed and anxious and exhausted. Eventually it got to the point where I thought I couldn’t keep going: ‘Maybe if I crashed my car into a tree ...’ I sought help and, making a long story very short, for the next several years I only had part-time custody of my sons. I am not going to go into detail about that period of our lives, as it is their story to tell if they choose to do so. When I look back at the things that made parenting so hard for me in those early years, I reflect on just how important a diagnosis can be. I thought that my inability to cope was a function of (a) my sons’ autism, and (b) my failure as a human being. In reality, much of my difficulty stemmed from my autism. My sensory hypersensitivities made feeding babies, changing nappies, and the ever-present crying a sensory nightmare that depleted my energy stores. My need for rituals and routines made dealing with the unpredictability of babies and toddlers extremely stressful, particularly when I had been led to believe that babies follow routines. My communication and social-interaction challenges meant that I couldn’t discern the meaning of their cries with the same instinct as neurotypical mums could, and I couldn’t articulate my concerns and needs to others. My overwhelming need to mask my natural (autistic) behaviours and to look and act like all the other mums was exhausting. If I had known my diagnosis then, if I had known that I was doing the best I could with the strengths and challenges I have as an autistic person, I would have asked for help and support when I needed it rather than hiding my struggles until it all fell apart. Chances are, if I had known my diagnosis, other people or services would have been able to offer the support I needed. The amazing part? Somehow, we came through it all with the very strong bond between us intact. Somehow, the boys knew that even though we only saw each other on weekends and holidays, I loved them with every fibre of my being. And somehow, amazingly, they loved me just as much. When they entered their early teens, we fought to be reunited. And we have been together since then. I don’t think I will ever be able to forgive myself for that dark period of our lives. I live with the guilt of failing to be the mother I was supposed to be, although they constantly reassure me that they have forgiven me. Without question my boys are two of the three best things in my life. We can talk to each other about anything, without the need for the conscious masking and editing that inhibits most of our social interactions with other people. They make me laugh, they make me proud, they make me feel safe, they make me feel loved, and they make me feel that it is OK to be me. Too Many Feelings: Sympathy, Empathy, and Grief When my best friend died, I was devastated. I don’t make friends easily, and he had been my friend and mentor for over a decade. He was one of the few people who really understood me and he’d had a profound impact on my life. I still remember almost verbatim the conversation we had when he rang to tell me he had been diagnosed with cancer. I felt like someone had pulled the world out from underneath my feet. Watching him get sicker and weaker was really hard. When I look back, I deeply regret how little time I spent with him in his last weeks. He was very clear, especially when talking to my husband, that he didn’t want me to visit him in hospital when he got really sick because he didn’t want me to see him in that state. I don’t know how much of that was to protect his sense of self and how much was to protect me, but I suspect a lot of it was the latter. I regret that I didn’t visit him more. I went to work and worked really hard, with particular focus on projects we had been working on together or ones that I knew were important to him. That was my way of being there for him. But when I look back I don’t think it was the right way. The truth of the matter is that I couldn’t handle seeing him sick and in pain, and I protected myself by trying not to think about it. I remember when his wife told us that he had passed away: the grief came crashing down and I sat in my room and cried. My younger son, who processes his emotions much like I do, was initially very sympathetic, because he understood that Mum’s friend had died and she was very sad. But within a few hours he was quite angry with me because he didn’t understand why I was still crying and wanted me to get over it. I knew he wasn’t being cruel, but I don’t think at that point I really understood why he felt the way he did. You have probably heard people say that autistic people don’t have empathy. This is not true. Actually, many autistic people are very empathetic. While we may not always be able to sense your feelings and respond to them in the way that a neurotypical person would, when we know how you are feeling we respond with our whole hearts. This is particularly the case for the people we love. When someone I care about is sad or in pain, I want to fix it, I want to make it better, I want to do something practical. That feeling can be so intense and so overwhelming that it is crippling. I struggle to find the right words to say, the right thing to do. I can write a 3000-word essay in a day, but I can spend a week trying to find the appropriate words for a sympathy card. Over time, and with the help of my younger son’s psychologist, I have come to understand that his reactions to my emotions—and my reactions to his—reflect the depth of our connection. In a very real sense we feel each other’s pain, and it hurts more than our own! When I am sick or sad or angry, he gets anxious: he wants to fix what is wrong, and if he can’t fix it he gets even sadder or angrier than I am. Similarly, I may struggle to understand or articulate my own discomfort,1 but when I see him in pain it overwhelms me. I was a first-aid cadet when I was a teenager, and I was very good at it. I could look at someone’s injury and calmly and quickly think through the likely causes, treatments and outcomes. However, as a parent I fall apart when one of my sons is sick or injured. My older son and I have a similar mind meld, but at a more intellectual and pragmatic level. When something happens in my work life or personal life that causes me sadness, anger or embarrassment, the first person I want to talk to is my older son. I know that I won’t need to articulate my complex thoughts and emotions: I just need to say ‘This thing happened’ and he will intuit how I am feeling. Sometimes I don’t even have to say anything. As I write this, I can think of two occasions in the past month when I was emotionally overwhelmed and he spontaneously called when I was on the verge of panic (to be honest, on one of those occasions I was over the verge), immediately understood what was happening, and talked me through it. Grief is hard for anyone, but I think it is perhaps even harder for an autistic person. As my younger son’s psychologist explained to us, many autistic people—including me and both of my sons—have a fairly narrow band of emotions where we feel comfortable. The way he described it to us was that it is like soundwaves. Autistic people have a narrow band of comfortable emotion. Being too angry or sad is really stressful, but being too happy or excited is equally hard. However, the light-bulb moment for us was when he explained that many autistic people feel emotions more strongly than neurotypical people. So our sad is really sad and our happy is really happy. What an awful combination—feeling emotions more intensely than typical people and at the same time having a much narrower comfort zone for emotional responses. I cope with strong emotions by trying to block out or compartmentalise them. For example, when something really bad happens in my personal life, I go to work and bury myself in what I am doing and try not to think about the emotional issues. I am actually pretty good at this and it works really well. Like many autistic people I have the ability to hyper-focus on a task, so if I am at work keeping busy I can effectively block out all of the thoughts about whatever is making me sad or scared or anxious. What makes it tough is when someone asks me how I’m feeling or gives me a hug. That causes my emotions to rise to the top and into my consciousness, and they come crashing down on me like a wave. My colleagues know me well enough to know that if I’m going through something emotional, the kindest thing they can do is pretend it isn’t happening and not ask me about it. When my best friend passed away I was devastated. My husband, who was also friends with him, was sad but probably not as deeply affected, so I had to manage my grief which, no matter how overwhelming it felt at times, was my own grief. I could shut it out at work by focusing on what I was doing and making sure no one asked me any questions about how I was feeling. For much of the time I could shut it out at home and, in fact, felt a strong sense of obligation to do so because it was causing my son so much distress. I still think about my friend all the time; many times when something happens in my life I wish I could share it with him, and I miss him all over again. It took five years before I could finally think about him without that overwhelming flood of emotion (as long as I am alone—if someone talks to me about him, the pain comes back like a hammer). I really struggle sometimes to understand the way that many neurotypical people deal with their emotions—for example, when someone experiences a loss and they want to keep talking about it. For me that’s the worst thing to do and I don’t really understand how it can make them feel better. As a manager in the workplace I have had to really work on this, because when a staff member experiences a death or a serious illness or a divorce and can’t come into work, that seems really odd to me because I feel that they are passing up the opportunity to escape from their grief and focus on something else. When our dog was diagnosed with lymphoma I found it really hard to accept both the reality of it and the emotions of it. At the time we had three pets: a nine-year-old cat we had adopted from the pound, a seven-year-old rescue dog with a nervous disorder, and a six-year-old dog who was a bundle of happy energy. Mentally I had prepared myself for the fact that our pets would die one day and that the cat would go first. Abraham was the oldest by a couple of years and was an outside cat. When we first got him, I read a lot about how long cats live and learnt that inside cats live much longer than outside cats; so initially we tried very hard to keep him inside. But he wanted to be outside sitting in the sun, chasing mice, and exploring the yard. After much family discussion we agreed that it was better for him to have the life he wanted even if that made it a bit shorter. So I was prepared for the fact that he would live for somewhere between ten and fourteen years (on average). Then, I reasoned, Ted would go next. He was the older of our two dogs, and when we first got him we didn’t think he would make it because he was so anxious and skittish that he wouldn’t take food from us or let us pet him. He had also had a number of illnesses and injuries, including a broken shoulder that had to be pinned in several places. So, logically, Jessie would go last. She was the youngest, healthiest and most energetic of our pets, and a continual bundle of energy. When Jessie got sick and stopped eating we took her to the vet, who told us not to worry. We then took her to the vet hospital, who advised that she was very sick and did lots of tests. They went through a series of possible diagnoses, then more tests, biopsies and surgeries, but she didn’t get better. They referred her to a specialist vet clinic where, after one more major surgery, she was diagnosed with lymphoma. They said she could have chemotherapy but it would only add a few months. They gave us a one-shot treatment and we brought her home. She had a brief few days of being her old goofy, energetic self and then became lethargic and increasingly weak. We all loved Jessie. She was the most beautiful and happiest dog I have ever met, and the only other female in our family besides me. As she became sicker and it became clear that she was going to die, I couldn’t understand why my feeling of loss and grief was so overwhelming. It was like a crushing, suffocating wave of sadness watching her become more frail and lethargic, looking into her eyes as the spark dimmed, patting her as she whimpered and then drifted off forever. I was so angry at the world. It wasn’t right, it wasn’t fair, I wasn’t ready. I still cry when I think of her—and I am still waiting for it to stop hurting. Thinking through what the psychologist told my son, I formed a theory about why losing Jessie was even harder than losing my best friend. My husband was devastated. Both of our children were devastated. Our other dog, who relied on Jessie for companionship and courage, was devastated. So I had to manage my grief, which was big, but also their grief, which was enormous. This meant that I couldn’t shut out my feelings because I was surrounded by people who felt them too. I felt their pain like it was my pain, and it was overwhelming. Notes A function of my challenges with proprioception (see Chapter 6) and interoception (Chapter 26). Part 5 Other Important Stuff Dealing with the Overwhelm: Meltdown, Shutdown, Burnout Three experiences that are common to many autistic people but are hard to explain to non-autistic people are meltdown, shutdown, and burnout. Each of these is a response to overwhelming aspects of our environment, but they differ in their intensity, outward appearance, and duration.1 I was invited to give a talk to a community group in Ballarat about my experiences as an autistic adult. I was a bit anxious because it was my first time speaking about myself specifically rather than about autism more broadly. I was a bit anxious because I didn’t know much about the people I would be speaking to (how many people, and what they already knew about autism) or the venue (Will it be easy to find? Will there be a place to park? Where should I go when I get there?). I was a bit anxious because it was a long drive (about ninety minutes), my husband was picking me up after work and he isn’t always punctual. However, he picked me up from the Melbourne CBD at the allotted hour and we headed off with plenty of time to arrive and find our way. Then, as we were crossing the West Gate Bridge, the car started to overheat. Now I was more than a little bit anxious (Are we going to get there? What if the car catches fire? How much will it cost to fix the car?). My hands and legs started to shake and I could feel my heart racing. My husband asked me to look at the map and locate the next exit. That was it: the last tiny shred I had of ‘Hold it together’ was gone. My whole body started to shake. I couldn’t speak. I couldn’t think. I couldn’t breathe. I started to make strange gasping noises.2 MELTDOWN The UK National Autistic Society says, ‘A meltdown is an intense response to an overwhelming situation. It happens when someone becomes completely overwhelmed by their situation and temporarily loses control of their behaviour.’ One of the things I have learnt from being a parent is that most people—that is, most non-autistic people—can’t tell the difference between a tantrum and a meltdown. I lost count of the number of times I was told by ‘well-meaning’ bystanders when one of my sons had a meltdown that he needed a smack or a stern word. I am not suggesting that my children never had tantrums (of course they did—they were children), just that the two responses are about as alike as chalk and cheese. When one of my sons had a ‘tantrum’, it had a clear purpose (I’ll do this and you will be so embarrassed/frustrated that you will do that) and it was relatively easy to stop (either by giving them what they wanted or offering something even more appealing). But when one of them had a ‘meltdown’, it was a response to a trigger: they were not trying to achieve a goal, and neither I nor they could stop it until it had run its course. Meltdowns are triggered by being overwhelmed, whether by sensory overload, an unexpected change of routine, anxiety, or an inability to communicate your needs. What is needed is for the trigger to go away so that you feel safe, and have time to recover. I don’t know whether I had the same sort of outwardly spectacular meltdowns as a child that my sons did. I suspect not as I was a very insular and restrained child, but this did not make a meltdown feel any less intense on the inside. It is worth noting (for parents in particular) that girls tend to internalise their reactions, which is one of the several reasons that autistic females tend to be diagnosed much later, and at a much lower rate, than males. Meltdowns are not unique to autistic children: they are also commonly experienced by autistic adults. They may be less frequent, in part because adults tend to have more control over their environment than children do, and in part because decades of social norms and dismissive glances have taught us to hold it in until we are alone. For the latter reason, they may also look different. A five-year-old who screams and kicks people might attract some judgemental stares, but a fifty-year-old who screams and kicks people is likely to attract a call to the police. I have to confess the meltdown I described at the beginning of this chapter was the first one my husband had ever seen. That doesn’t mean that I don’t have occasional (and sometimes frequent) meltdowns. It means that I had become very adept at holding them in and hiding them until I could escape to a part of the house where no one could see me. All those years of internalising other people’s expectations of how I should manage my emotions, coupled with my experience as a parent of watching people’s reactions to my children’s meltdowns, had taught me that my meltdowns were something to be deeply ashamed of and to be hidden at all costs. It was only due to the fact that we • • • • • • • • • • • were in a moving car and there was nowhere I could hide that he saw it happen. He was surprised to discover that this was not a one-off experience; I was surprised to discover that, rather than running away, he wanted to know how to help. SHUTDOWN The blog Speaking of Autism describes a shutdown as ‘essentially just an internalised meltdown ... However, rather than exploding as in during a meltdown, the person implodes.’ Shutdowns are less obvious—and less disturbing—to onlookers than meltdowns. However, they are very distressing for the person experiencing them. Shutdowns, like meltdowns, are caused by an overload of information flowing into the brain (whether that is sensory information, social interaction, or task demands). They can vary in duration from minutes to days, depending on how long it takes for the person’s brain to recover from ‘the overwhelm’ and reboot. Short shutdowns are often mistaken for a person not paying attention, zoning out or being rude. With a bit of luck an autistic person can mask or recover from a brief shutdown by taking a break from the situation, like ducking out to the bathroom (assuming we have the capacity to move). If we are really lucky, someone who knows us well enough to realise what is happening can help us to withdraw from the situation or, if that is not possible, take the pressure off us to interact with the world. This can be as simple as picking up on a lull in the conversation and stepping in, or taking action to reduce the Overwhelm (like when my husband hands me my sunglasses in a restaurant or I pass a Pop It toy to my son under the table). Longer shutdowns can be more difficult for people to understand, and can be mistaken for laziness or rudeness or obstinance. An autistic person in shutdown is physically and emotionally exhausted. If you ask how they feel or what is wrong, they might not answer because they don’t really know or because it takes too much energy to turn their feelings into words. They might not have the energy to get out of bed, have a shower, hold a conversation. Meltdowns and shutdowns have a number of things in common. They have similar causes: total overwhelm from too much input. They have similar immediate effects (for us): a feeling of being unable to control our own bodies. They also have similar long-term effects: after a meltdown or shutdown we feel tired and need time to recover—this can be a few days or a few weeks. Fortunately, they are also similar in the things that people can do to help (or not help). Some of the things that don’t help us (during and after) a meltdown or shutdown are: being told to ‘Pull yourself together’ or ‘Tough it out’ being asked to explain what is wrong people trying to distract us being made to feel like we have embarrassed or failed the people we care about people touching us (unless we have articulated that we want them to). Some of the things that can help us (during and after) a meltdown or shutdown are: having time and space to recover (even if this means taking time off work/school or missing ‘important’ events) not having to make decisions or answer questions (don’t ask me what I want to eat— bring me something you know I like) not feeling judged or criticised for not meeting other people’s expectations spending time in a low-stress environment reducing sensory stimuli (dimming lights, turning down loud noises) having access to comfort objects (a favourite blanket, stim toys, a good book). • • • • • • • • • • • • • AUTISTIC BURNOUT Autistic American author and researcher Dora Raymaker and her colleagues have described autistic burnout as ‘a syndrome conceptualized as resulting from chronic life stress and a mismatch of expectations and abilities without adequate supports. It is characterized by pervasive, long-term (typically 3+ months) exhaustion, loss of function, and reduced tolerance to stimulus.’3 I have experienced several periods of autistic burnout, although for most of them I didn’t have the terminology to explain what was happening and accepted the labels other people attached to me. The first was as a teenager when I went from being an enthusiastic, committed student to a high-school dropout; this was labelled ‘rebellion’. The most recent was during 2020; this was labelled ‘COVID-19 depression’. Other episodes were labelled ‘postnatal depression’, ‘nervous breakdown’ and ‘menopause-related anxiety’. These were the labels applied by other people; the one that I consistently applied to myself was ‘failure’. Each of these periods resulted in weeks or months of me being unable to cope with the day-to-day demands of my life and unable to imagine a future in which I could be happy and in control of my life. A lifetime of masking had taught me not to let other people see the cracks or admit that I couldn’t meet the expectations of the ‘role’ that I was in. For the most part I continued to go to work, to meet the targets that were set for me, and to convey a facade of calm and capability. The first thing to fall by the wayside was usually my hobbies and interests: I would stop reading books, doing my craft activities, and playing with my dolls or other collections. Next would come the withdrawal from ‘non-compulsory’ social interactions: no talking to friends, going to the store or even interacting with my husband and children. Then would come the abandonment of every other activity that wasn’t essential to existence. I would come home from work, cry, eat, sleep ... get up, go to work, come home from work, cry, eat, sleep ... I would like to say that each of these periods of burnout resolved themselves as I found that ‘inner strength’ we are all told that we have, pulled myself up by my bootstraps and got on with it. The reality, however, is that each ended in one of three scenarios. The first was an admission of defeat (although this was only in my younger years), where I just stopped studying/working/performing and focused on sleep and self-medication until I eventually recovered. The second was a mental health crash, where my inability to cope became so apparent that I either sought or was directed to mental health support, such as counselling, medication and/or external intervention. The third (and most common) was a physical health crash, where the impact on my body of trying to push through the burnout resulted in serious physical illness that required medical intervention. Each of these ‘solutions’ shared a similar conclusion in my mind: I am a fundamentally inadequate human being. Despite the differences in duration and impact of these periods, they shared common features (which I now know to be characteristics of autistic burnout), including: constant fatigue and exhaustion increased sensitivity to sensory stimuli, and sensory overload increased difficulty coping with social interaction a constant feeling of vagueness/brain fog reduced executive functioning (difficulty in planning, organising, and completing tasks) increased anxiety and depression feelings of worthlessness loss of interest and enthusiasm feeling overwhelmed and unable to cope increased frustration and irritability decreased ability to communicate effectively more frequent shutdowns and meltdowns • increased physical health problems overwhelming feelings of guilt. While each period of burnout differed in its specific causes, related to my current life stage and role(s), looking back I can see that they shared a common core feature: the expectations placed on me (by myself and others) exceeded my ability to meet these demands. Prior to my diagnosis, ‘failure’ was the only explanation that made sense. Other people could cope with life and its demands and I couldn’t, so the problem had to be me. Following my diagnosis, I came to realise that neurotypical4 people actually experience the world differently and that many of the things I thought were universal reactions were related to my autistic processing system. The realisation that so many of the things that take conscious and sustained effort for autistic people come naturally and instinctively to neurotypical people was a bit of a light-bulb moment for me. Neurotypical people don’t find sensory input so overwhelming! They don’t struggle to shut out some inputs to focus on others! They don’t need to consciously prepare for and plan every social interaction! They don’t need to mask their natural movements to fit in with other people! They just ‘know’ what to say and how to act! Seriously!!!???? No wonder they have so much energy and capacity. My diagnosis—and many hours of conversation with my psychologist—has enabled me to be more self-aware and to recognise the early signs of burnout and (sometimes) to be a bit more gentle on myself and take steps to avoid, or reduce the severity of, the crash. When I feel myself becoming overwhelmed and approaching a potential burnout, I look for ways to reduce my social interactions, sensory input, workload, expectations. I book in some leave from work or organise to work from home. I accept the need to decline meetings and social invitations that I don’t have the energy for, and I block out time to be alone. I try to take the very good advice offered by my psychologist: Me: There is a lot going on at work and I am really struggling at the moment. I feel like I have no energy at the end of the day. I spent the whole weekend in bed. I feel so guilty! Psychologist: Why do you feel guilty? Me: Because I know that I should be doing something useful on the weekend, not staying in bed or on the couch doing nothing. Psychologist: But you aren’t doing nothing. You are doing something very productive. You are giving your body time to recover from the overwhelm of the week. Me: But I should be cleaning the house, organising the cupboards, catching up with family ... Psychologist: Try replacing ‘should’ with ‘could’. You could be cleaning the house. You could be organising the cupboards. Or you could be giving your mind and your body the time they need to reboot and prepare for the stress of the coming week. Notes ‘The Overwhelm’ is a term we use in our family to describe the feeling of too much input. I did eventually recover (thanks to my older son talking me through the crisis over the phone), and we ended up in a nearby service station. DM Raymaker et al., ‘“Having All of Your Internal Resources Exhausted Beyond Measure and Being Left With No Clean-Up Crew”: Defining Autistic Burnout’, Autism in Adulthood, 2(2), 2020, pp. 132–43. I have deliberately used the term ‘neurotypical’ here rather than ‘non-autistic’ as I am aware that many of the challenges experienced by autistic people are common to other neurodiverse people. Interoception: Health Care and Self-Care CONTENT WARNING: This chapter discusses a range of body functions, so you might want to make sure you aren’t reading it in a public place. It was a Tuesday and I had been feeling a bit strange for a few days. I tried to explain how I was feeling to my husband but I couldn’t get any clearer than ‘I feel a bit weird’. I knew I was tired, and maybe a bit grumpy. Perhaps I was stressed? Or maybe a bit more anxious than normal? By Thursday I noticed that the butterflies were getting stronger and I was finding it hard to focus. Had I eaten something weird? Maybe I was having a bout of depression. On Friday my husband insisted we go to the doctor. I fidgeted in the surgery chair, trying to find the words to explain how I was feeling: tired? vague? hot? weird? sore? The doctor thought it was probably depression, but suggested we run some blood tests just to be sure. By Saturday morning I had figured out that the ‘weird feeling’ was abdominal pain. By Saturday night I was at the emergency department trying to articulate answers to questions like ‘Where exactly does it hurt? How bad is the pain on a scale of 1 to 10? Do you have any other symptoms?’ By midnight I had been admitted to hospital with a diagnosis of pancreatitis, and I spent the next week on intravenous fluids and pain medications. Interoception is the perception of sensations from inside the body and includes physical sensations related to internal organ function, such as heartbeat, respiration and satiety, as well as the autonomic nervous system activity related to emotions.1 It tells us when we are hungry, thirsty, hot, cold, in pain, anxious, stressed, or need to go to the bathroom. Many autistic people have difficulties with interoception, being less—or more—receptive to messages from their bodies’ internal sensors.2 Like many autistic people, I was unaware of the concept of interoception (the ‘eighth sense’) for most of my life. That is not to say I didn’t have interoceptive challenges, just that I didn’t have a name for why I couldn’t answer when people asked me how I ‘felt’ or why people close to me could better explain my physical sensations than I could. However, I was very much aware of this issue with my sons (the younger one in particular), so I had an inkling that it was an ‘autism thing’. AM I HOT OR AM I COLD? One of the questions I hear a lot from parents of autistic children is ‘Why does my child walk around in a T-shirt in the middle of winter / a sweater in the middle of summer? Don’t they feel the cold/heat?’ The short answer is ‘No, they don’t’ but the more accurate answer is probably ‘Maybe they do, but they don’t know that is what they are feeling’. As a parent, I have come to accept that if I walk into the living room on a sweltering-hot day and see that my son’s face is bright red and has perspiration dripping down it, I need to say, ‘Hey, gorgeous boy, you should take your sweater off.’ We also have a series of dress guidelines in our house that are governed by the weather, such as at what temperature you need a sweater, and we all have a weather app on our phone and temperature gauges in our rooms. On a regular basis my husband walks into a room I am in and says, ‘It’s freezing in here—why didn’t you turn the heater on?’ (in winter) or ‘Why haven’t you turned the fan on? Don’t you feel hot?’ (in summer). In most of these cases, if I were to think about how I ‘felt’ I would describe a general level of discomfort but not be able to specifically identify it as being due to the room temperature. I am now in my fifties and at work it is still the case that someone else (usually my wonderful executive officer) notices that my office is like an icebox or a sauna and makes the relevant changes to the temperature regulation. AM I HUNGRY OR THIRSTY? Apparently the trick to maintaining a healthy weight is to ‘only eat when you are hungry’ and ‘stop eating when you are full’. The only problem with that is if you don’t know when you are hungry and/or full. I often need to be reminded to stop what I am doing and eat lunch, whether at work or at home, but people regularly comment on the sheer amount of food I can eat once it is in front of me. My mother-in-law still marvels at the fact that I can eat the same meal as my husband, who is almost twice my body size. For me—and for my sons—a schedule for meals is the only practical solution. This has the side benefit of fulfilling our need for routine and ritual. I eat the same thing for breakfast at the same time every day. I have ‘lunchtime’ marked in my office calendar every workday so I don’t forget to have lunch. Unfortunately, this doesn’t stop me overeating! My sons and I remind each other to drink water, and have systems in place to ensure we keep up our fluid intake. I have a water jug on my desk at work that is filled each morning and needs to be empty by the time I leave; my younger son has a water bottle that he carries around with him and another beside his bed. DO I NEED TO GO TO THE BATHROOM? As a young parent, it was a regular feature of family outings that my younger son would suddenly declare that he ‘needed’ to go to the toilet. From the initial ‘I need to pee’ to the action itself, we usually had less than five minutes. I was that crazy mother you see in the shopping mall demanding that they let her child use the staff bathroom or she would let him pee on the floor. I grew up in the generation where the mantra was ‘Everyone go pee before we get in the car, even if you don’t need to’. I never understood the logic of that as a child, and as an adult I learnt that this strategy could actually lead to reduced bladder control and the consequent need to respond to the call of nature with great speed. I am sure most parents can identify with this experience regardless of their child’s neurotype, but for many autistic people such challenges are evident across many aspects of bodily sensations. As my son got older this became less of an issue and I assumed he had ‘grown out of it’. I also assumed it was one interoceptive challenge that I had escaped—that is, until I was in hospital following a surgical procedure that required me to stay in bed hooked up to various tubes and leads. When I realised that I needed to pee and I wasn’t able to leave the bed, I rang for the nurse and asked for a bedpan. When I was done and she came back to collect the pan, the conversation went like this: Nurse: Why didn’t you ask for a bedpan earlier? Me: Because I didn’t need one earlier. Nurse: You should have called as soon as you felt like you needed to go. Me: I did. Then followed a long lecture about the importance of not letting your bladder get overfull and how the amount of urine in my bedpan clearly indicated that I had held on for far too long. The nurse seemed convinced that I had intentionally held on because I was too embarrassed to ask for a bedpan; I was equally convinced that my body was functioning as per normal. That was when I realised that there is a reason that so many people complain about waking up in the night needing to pee and I only need to go to the bathroom two or three times in a 24-hour period. AM I IN PAIN? Visits to the doctor in our family are a group outing: when the doctor calls out the patient’s name, we all troop in together. After the usual greetings we get to the question of what brought us here today, and the conversation usually goes something like this: Doctor: So, where is the pain? Patient: In my abdomen. Doctor: Where specifically in your abdomen? Upper, lower, left, right ...? Patient: I’m not sure. Sort of in the middle, maybe? Family member: The pain seems to be quite high up and over to the left. [Family member has previously noticed that this is where the patient puts their hand when they are hurting.] Doctor: How severe is the pain? Is it a sharp pain, or an ache? Is it constant or does it come and go? Patient: I’m not sure. Family member: It seems to be pretty constant, but more severe after they eat. Doctor: How long has this been happening? Patient: I think maybe a few days or a few months. Family member: It started about a week ago but has got worse in the last couple of days. I am pretty good at describing what is going on with my sons, particularly the younger one; I can get a sense of his symptoms from his facial expressions and his movements, and from his overall mood and demeanour. However, I am pretty hopeless at understanding and articulating my own pain or symptoms, and usually insist that my husband comes along to the doctor to answer the questions I get stumped on. This is more than an amusing anecdote: it has really important ramifications for autistic people with interoception problems and the people who care about them. As a child I suffered from intermittent bouts of severe abdominal pain. My parents took me to doctor after doctor trying to identify the cause (and appropriate treatment). In retrospect I can see that one of the biggest challenges was my inability to describe my symptoms. I knew that I was in a lot of pain but I couldn’t articulate the details they were looking for, and the hesitation and variation in my responses often led to the conclusion that I was ‘imagining it’ or ‘making it up’. It was not until I was in my thirties, after decades of visits to different doctors and endless tests, that the source of my problems was actually identified and appropriate treatment prescribed. I can recall episodes where my younger son has gone on long walks and not processed or articulated the fact that the discomfort he experienced was due to blisters on his feet or the skin on his inner thighs being rubbed raw; or where I have had one of my numerous collisions with furniture but it has taken someone else noticing that my foot is changing colour for me to go to the doctor and learn that I have broken a bone. In recent years I have developed hypoglycaemia, the cause of which is being investigated. It was first identified when I was in hospital for an unrelated condition: a routine blood sugar test resulted in nurses rushing in with glasses of sugar water and a glucose drip. In a similar way to my experience with the bedpan, I was chastised for not advising the staff earlier of my symptoms. Nurse: You should have called for a nurse when you first noticed the symptoms. Me: What symptoms? Nurse: The feeling of disorientation, for one. Me: I did feel a bit weird, but I often feel a bit weird. Nurse: Well, how about the fact that your hands are shaking? Me: They are? Oh yes, I see what you mean. Nurse: And the fact that you are having trouble answering questions. Me: Oh, I thought I must just be tired. I now have a blood sugar monitor and am supposed to take a reading whenever I feel ‘symptoms’ and take appropriate action if my blood sugar is low. The second part I am fine with: if my blood sugar is below 4.0, I need to eat some jelly beans and then something more substantial. It is the first part I struggle with. Sometimes when I feel ‘symptoms’ I take my blood sugar and it is over 5 (this is good); other times it is under 3 (this is bad). Then there are the times that I feel no symptoms at all but someone else in the family notices that I am looking vague or not making sense when I speak. AM I ANXIOUS, STRESSED, AGITATED, OR SICK? Interoception also impacts the way we experience and understand emotional responses. For most people, being able to recognise those butterflies in your stomach as a sign that you are stressed means you can take steps to deal with the stress, whether that is reducing your workload, going for a run or taking a ‘mental health day’. People with interoceptive challenges may not even notice the butterflies. If we do notice them, we may not be able to determine whether they are telling us that we are hungry, we are stressed, the lights are too bright, or we have a nasty bout of gastro. There is significant interaction between interoception and other aspects of the autistic experience, including sensory hypersensitivity, the Overwhelm, and autistic burnout. While much of the research focuses on how we can ‘teach’ autistic people to be more in tune with their bodies, a more practical (and helpful) approach would be to be aware of and responsive to the interoception challenges experienced by autistic people. Notes CJ Price & C Hooven, ‘Interoceptive Awareness Skills for Emotion Regulation: Theory and Approach of Mindful Awareness in Body-Oriented Therapy (MABT)’, Frontiers in Psychology, 9(798), 2018. I recently read a journal article that claimed that autistic children have interoceptive challenges but autistic adults don’t—the authors were clearly not autistic people!